in her escape
  SPEED, a clownish servant to Valentine
  LAUNCE, the like to Proteus
  PANTHINO, servant to Antonio
  HOST, where Julia lodges in Milan
  OUTLAWS, with Valentine

  JULIA, a lady of Verona, beloved of Proteus
  SILVIA, the Duke's daughter, beloved of Valentine
  LUCETTA, waiting-woman to Julia

  SERVANTS MUSICIANS

SCENE: Verona; Milan; the frontiers of Mantua

ACT I. SCENE I. Verona. An open place

Enter VALENTINE and PROTEUS

  VALENTINE. Cease to persuade, my loving Proteus:
    Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits.
    Were't not affection chains thy tender days
    To the sweet glances of thy honour'd love,
    I rather would entreat thy company
    To see the wonders of the world abroad,
    Than, living dully sluggardiz'd at home,
    Wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness.
    But since thou lov'st, love still, and thrive therein,
    Even as I would, when I to love begin.
  PROTEUS. Wilt thou be gone? Sweet Valentine, adieu!
    Think on thy Proteus, when thou haply seest
    Some rare noteworthy object in thy travel.
    Wish me partaker in thy happiness
    When thou dost meet good hap; and in thy danger,
    If ever danger do environ thee,
    Commend thy grievance to my holy prayers,
    For I will be thy headsman, Valentine.
  VALENTINE. And on a love-book pray for my success?
  PROTEUS. Upon some book I love I'll pray for thee.
  VALENTINE. That's on some shallow story of deep love:
    How young Leander cross'd the Hellespont.
  PROTEUS. That's a deep story of a deeper love;
    For he was more than over shoes in love.
  VALENTINE. 'Tis true; for you are over boots in love,
    And yet you never swum the Hellespont.
  PROTEUS. Over the boots! Nay, give me not the boots.
  VALENTINE. No, I will not, for it boots thee not.
  PROTEUS. What?
  VALENTINE. To be in love- where scorn is bought with groans,
    Coy looks with heart-sore sighs, one fading moment's mirth
    With twenty watchful, weary, tedious nights;
    If haply won, perhaps a hapless gain;
    If lost, why then a grievous labour won;
    However, but a folly bought with wit,
    Or else a wit by folly vanquished.
  PROTEUS. So, by your circumstance, you call me fool.
  VALENTINE. So, by your circumstance, I fear you'll prove.
  PROTEUS. 'Tis love you cavil at; I am not Love.
  VALENTINE. Love is your master, for he masters you;
    And he that is so yoked by a fool,
    Methinks, should not be chronicled for wise.
  PROTEUS. Yet writers say, as in the sweetest bud
    The eating canker dwells, so eating love
    Inhabits in the finest wits of all.
  VALENTINE. And writers say, as the most forward bud
    Is eaten by the canker ere it blow,
    Even so by love the young and tender wit
    Is turn'd to folly, blasting in the bud,
    Losing his verdure even in the prime,
    And all the fair effects of future hopes.
    But wherefore waste I time to counsel the
    That art a votary to fond desire?
    Once more adieu. My father at the road
    Expects my coming, there to see me shipp'd.
  PROTEUS. And thither will I bring thee, Valentine.
  VALENTINE. Sweet Proteus, no; now let us take our leave.
    To Milan let me hear from thee by letters
    Of thy success in love, and what news else
    Betideth here in absence of thy friend;
    And I likewise will visit thee with mine.
  PROTEUS. All happiness bechance to thee in Milan!
  VALENTINE. As much to you at home; and so farewell!
                                                  Exit VALENTINE
  PROTEUS. He after honour hunts, I after love;
    He leaves his friends to dignify them more:
    I leave myself, my friends, and all for love.
    Thou, Julia, thou hast metamorphis'd me,
    Made me neglect my studies, lose my time,
    War with good counsel, set the world at nought;
    Made wit with musing weak, heart sick with thought.

                         Enter SPEED

  SPEED. Sir Proteus, save you! Saw you my master?
  PROTEUS. But now he parted hence to embark for Milan.
  SPEED. Twenty to one then he is shipp'd already,
    And I have play'd the sheep in losing him.
  PROTEUS. Indeed a sheep doth very often stray,
    An if the shepherd be awhile away.
  SPEED. You conclude that my master is a shepherd then, and
    I a sheep?
  PROTEUS. I do.
  SPEED. Why then, my horns are his horns, whether I wake or sleep.
  PROTEUS. A silly answer, and fitting well a sheep.
  SPEED. This proves me still a sheep.
  PROTEUS. True; and thy master a shepherd.
  SPEED. Nay, that I can deny by a circumstance.
  PROTEUS. It shall go hard but I'll prove it by another.
  SPEED. The shepherd seeks the sheep, and not the sheep the
    shepherd; but I seek my master, and my master seeks not me;
    therefore, I am no sheep.
  PROTEUS. The sheep for fodder follow the shepherd; the shepherd for
    food follows not the sheep: thou for wages followest thy master;
    thy master for wages follows not thee. Therefore, thou art a
    sheep.
  SPEED. Such another proof will make me cry 'baa.'
  PROTEUS. But dost thou hear? Gav'st thou my letter to Julia?
  SPEED. Ay, sir; I, a lost mutton, gave your letter to her, a lac'd
    mutton; and she, a lac'd mutton, gave me, a lost mutton, nothing
    for my labour.
  PROTEUS. Here's too small a pasture for such store of muttons.
  SPEED. If the ground be overcharg'd, you were best stick her.
  PROTEUS. Nay, in that you are astray: 'twere best pound you.
  SPEED. Nay, sir, less than a pound shall serve me for carrying your
    letter.
  PROTEUS. You mistake; I mean the pound- a pinfold.
  SPEED. From a pound to a pin? Fold it over and over,
    'Tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to your lover.
  PROTEUS. But what said she?
  SPEED.  [Nodding]  Ay.
  PROTEUS. Nod- ay. Why, that's 'noddy.'
  SPEED. You mistook, sir; I say she did nod; and you ask me if she
    did nod; and I say 'Ay.'
  PROTEUS. And that set together is 'noddy.'
  SPEED. Now you have taken the pains to set it together, take it for
    your pains.
  PROTEUS. No, no; you shall have it for bearing the letter.
  SPEED. Well, I perceive I must be fain to bear with you.
  PROTEUS. Why, sir, how do you bear with me?
  SPEED. Marry, sir, the letter, very orderly; having nothing but the
    word 'noddy' for my pains.
  PROTEUS. Beshrew me, but you have a quick wit.
  SPEED. And yet it cannot overtake your slow purse.
  PROTEUS. Come, come, open the matter; in brief, what said she?
  SPEED. Open your purse, that the money and the matter may be both
    at once delivered.
  PROTEUS. Well, sir, here is for your pains. What said she?
  SPEED. Truly, sir, I think you'll hardly win her.
  PROTEUS. Why, couldst thou perceive so much from her?
  SPEED. Sir, I could perceive nothing at all from her; no, not so
    much as a ducat for delivering your letter; and being so hard to
    me that brought your mind, I fear she'll prove as hard to you in
    telling your mind. Give her no token but stones, for she's as
    hard as steel.
  PROTEUS. What said she? Nothing?
  SPEED. No, not so much as 'Take this for thy pains.' To testify
    your bounty, I thank you, you have testern'd me; in requital
    whereof, henceforth carry your letters yourself; and so, sir,
    I'll commend you to my master.
  PROTEUS. Go, go, be gone, to save your ship from wreck,
    Which cannot perish, having thee aboard,
    Being destin'd to a drier death on shore.         Exit SPEED
    I must go send some better messenger.
    I fear my Julia would not deign my lines,
    Receiving them from such a worthless post.              Exit

SCENE II. Verona. The garden Of JULIA'S house

Enter JULIA and LUCETTA

  JULIA. But say, Lucetta, now we are alone,
    Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love?
  LUCETTA. Ay, madam; so you stumble not unheedfully.
  JULIA. Of all the fair resort of gentlemen
    That every day with parle encounter me,
    In thy opinion which is worthiest love?
  LUCETTA. Please you, repeat their names; I'll show my mind
    According to my shallow simple skill.
  JULIA. What think'st thou of the fair Sir Eglamour?
  LUCETTA. As of a knight well-spoken, neat, and fine;
    But, were I you, he never should be mine.
  JULIA. What think'st thou of the rich Mercatio?
  LUCETTA. Well of his wealth; but of himself, so so.
  JULIA. What think'st thou of the gentle Proteus?
  LUCETTA. Lord, Lord! to see what folly reigns in us!
  JULIA. How now! what means this passion at his name?
  LUCETTA. Pardon, dear madam; 'tis a passing shame
    That I, unworthy body as I am,
    Should censure thus on lovely gentlemen.
  JULIA. Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest?
  LUCETTA. Then thus: of many good I think him best.
  JULIA. Your reason?
  LUCETTA. I have no other but a woman's reason:
    I think him so, because I think him so.
  JULIA. And wouldst thou have me cast my love on him?
  LUCETTA. Ay, if you thought your love not cast away.
  JULIA. Why, he, of all the rest, hath never mov'd me.
  LUCETTA. Yet he, of all the rest, I think, best loves ye.
  JULIA. His little speaking shows his love but small.
  LUCETTA. Fire that's closest kept burns most of all.
  JULIA. They do not love that do not show their love.
  LUCETTA. O, they love least that let men know their love.
  JULIA. I would I knew his mind.
  LUCETTA. Peruse this paper, madam.
  JULIA. 'To Julia'- Say, from whom?
  LUCETTA. That the contents will show.
  JULIA. Say, say, who gave it thee?
  LUCETTA. Sir Valentine's page; and sent, I think, from Proteus.
    He would have given it you; but I, being in the way,
    Did in your name receive it; pardon the fault, I pray.
  JULIA. Now, by my modesty, a goodly broker!
    Dare you presume to harbour wanton lines?
    To whisper and conspire against my youth?
    Now, trust me, 'tis an office of great worth,
    And you an officer fit for the place.
    There, take the paper; see it be return'd;
    Or else return no more into my sight.
  LUCETTA. To plead for love deserves more fee than hate.
  JULIA. Will ye be gone?
  LUCETTA. That you may ruminate.                           Exit
  JULIA. And yet, I would I had o'erlook'd the letter.
    It were a shame to call her back again,
    And pray her to a fault for which I chid her.
    What fool is she, that knows I am a maid
    And would not force the letter to my view!
    Since maids, in modesty, say 'No' to that
    Which they would have the profferer construe 'Ay.'
    Fie, fie, how wayward is this foolish love,
    That like a testy babe will scratch the nurse,
    And presently, all humbled, kiss the rod!
    How churlishly I chid Lucetta hence,
    When willingly I would have had her here!
    How angerly I taught my brow to frown,
    When inward joy enforc'd my heart to smile!
    My penance is to call Lucetta back
    And ask remission for my folly past.
    What ho! Lucetta!

                     Re-enter LUCETTA

  LUCETTA. What would your ladyship?
  JULIA. Is't near dinner time?
  LUCETTA. I would it were,
    That you might kill your stomach on your meat
    And not upon your maid.
  JULIA. What is't that you took up so gingerly?
  LUCETTA. Nothing.
  JULIA. Why didst thou stoop then?
  LUCETTA. To take a paper up that I let fall.
  JULIA. And is that paper nothing?
  LUCETTA. Nothing concerning me.
  JULIA. Then let it lie for those that it concerns.
  LUCETTA. Madam, it will not lie where it concerns,
    Unless it have a false interpreter.
  JULIA. Some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme.
  LUCETTA. That I might sing it, madam, to a tune.
    Give me a note; your ladyship can set.
  JULIA. As little by such toys as may be possible.
    Best sing it to the tune of 'Light o' Love.'
  LUCETTA. It is too heavy for so light a tune.
  JULIA. Heavy! belike it hath some burden then.
  LUCETTA. Ay; and melodious were it, would you sing it.
  JULIA. And why not you?
  LUCETTA. I cannot reach so high.
  JULIA. Let's see your song.     [LUCETTA withholds the letter]
    How now, minion!
  LUCETTA. Keep tune there still, so you will sing it out.
    And yet methinks I do not like this tune.
  JULIA. You do not!
  LUCETTA. No, madam; 'tis too sharp.
  JULIA. You, minion, are too saucy.
  LUCETTA. Nay, now you are too flat
    And mar the concord with too harsh a descant;
    There wanteth but a mean to fill your song.
  JULIA. The mean is drown'd with your unruly bass.
  LUCETTA. Indeed, I bid the base for Proteus.
  JULIA. This babble shall not henceforth trouble me.
    Here is a coil with protestation!         [Tears the letter]
    Go, get you gone; and let the papers lie.
    You would be fing'ring them, to anger me.
  LUCETTA. She makes it strange; but she would be best pleas'd
    To be so ang'red with another letter.                   Exit
  JULIA. Nay, would I were so ang'red with the same!
    O hateful hands, to tear such loving words!
    Injurious wasps, to feed on such sweet honey
    And kill the bees that yield it with your stings!
    I'll kiss each several paper for amends.
    Look, here is writ 'kind Julia.' Unkind Julia,
    As in revenge of thy ingratitude,
    I throw thy name against the bruising stones,
    Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain.
    And here is writ 'love-wounded Proteus.'
    Poor wounded name! my bosom, as a bed,
    Shall lodge thee till thy wound be throughly heal'd;
    And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss.
    But twice or thrice was 'Proteus' written down.
    Be calm, good wind, blow not a word away
    Till I have found each letter in the letter-
    Except mine own name; that some whirlwind bear
    Unto a ragged, fearful, hanging rock,
    And throw it thence into the raging sea.
    Lo, here in one line is his name twice writ:
    'Poor forlorn Proteus, passionate Proteus,
    To the sweet Julia.' That I'll tear away;
    And yet I will not, sith so prettily
    He couples it to his complaining names.
    Thus will I fold them one upon another;
    Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.

                        Re-enter LUCETTA

  LUCETTA. Madam,
    Dinner is ready, and your father stays.
  JULIA. Well, let us go.
  LUCETTA. What, shall these papers lie like tell-tales here?
  JULIA. If you respect them, best to take them up.
  LUCETTA. Nay, I was taken up for laying them down;
    Yet here they shall not lie for catching cold.
  JULIA. I see you have a month's mind to them.
  LUCETTA. Ay, madam, you may say what sights you see;
    I see things too, although you judge I wink.
  JULIA. Come, come; will't please you go?                Exeunt

SCENE III. Verona. ANTONIO'S house

Enter ANTONIO and PANTHINO

  ANTONIO. Tell me, Panthino, what sad talk was that
    Wherewith my brother held you in the cloister?
  PANTHINO. 'Twas of his nephew Proteus, your son.
  ANTONIO. Why, what of him?
  PANTHINO. He wond'red that your lordship
    Would suffer him to spend his youth at home,
    While other men, of slender reputation,
    Put forth their sons to seek preferment out:
    Some to the wars, to try their fortune there;
    Some to discover islands far away;
    Some to the studious universities.
    For any, or for all these exercises,
    He said that Proteus, your son, was meet;
    And did request me to importune you
    To let him spend his time no more at home,
    Which would be great impeachment to his age,
    In having known no travel in his youth.
  ANTONIO. Nor need'st thou much importune me to that
    Whereon this month I have been hammering.
    I have consider'd well his loss of time,
    And how he cannot be a perfect man,
    Not being tried and tutor'd in the world:
    Experience is by industry achiev'd,
    And perfected by the swift course of time.
    Then tell me whither were I best to send him.
  PANTHINO. I think your lordship is not ignorant
    How his companion, youthful Valentine,
    Attends the Emperor in his royal court.
  ANTONIO. I know it well.
  PANTHINO. 'Twere good, I think, your lordship sent him thither:
    There shall he practise tilts and tournaments,
    Hear sweet discourse, converse with noblemen,
    And be in eye of every exercise
    Worthy his youth and nobleness of birth.
  ANTONIO. I like thy counsel; well hast thou advis'd;
    And that thou mayst perceive how well I like it,
    The execution of it shall make known:
    Even with the speediest expedition
    I will dispatch him to the Emperor's court.
  PANTHINO. To-morrow, may it please you, Don Alphonso
    With other gentlemen of good esteem
    Are journeying to salute the Emperor,
    And to commend their service to his will.
  ANTONIO. Good company; with them shall Proteus go.

                        Enter PROTEUS

    And- in good time!- now will we break with him.
  PROTEUS. Sweet love! sweet lines! sweet life!
    Here is her hand, the agent of her heart;
    Here is her oath for love, her honour's pawn.
    O that our fathers would applaud our loves,
    To seal our happiness with their consents!
    O heavenly Julia!
  ANTONIO. How now! What letter are you reading there?
  PROTEUS. May't please your lordship, 'tis a word or two
    Of commendations sent from Valentine,
    Deliver'd by a friend that came from him.
  ANTONIO. Lend me the letter; let me see what news.
  PROTEUS. There is no news, my lord; but that he writes
    How happily he lives, how well-belov'd
    And daily graced by the Emperor;
    Wishing me with him, partner of his fortune.
  ANTONIO. And how stand you affected to his wish?
  PROTEUS. As one relying on your lordship's will,
    And not depending on his friendly wish.
  ANTONIO. My will is something sorted with his wish.
    Muse not that I thus suddenly proceed;
    For what I will, I will, and there an end.
    I am resolv'd that thou shalt spend some time
    With Valentinus in the Emperor's court;
    What maintenance he from his friends receives,
    Like exhibition thou shalt have from me.
    To-morrow be in readiness to go-
    Excuse it not, for I am peremptory.
  PROTEUS. My lord, I cannot be so soon provided;
    Please you, deliberate a day or two.
  ANTONIO. Look what thou want'st shall be sent after thee.
    No more of stay; to-morrow thou must go.
    Come on, Panthino; you shall be employ'd
    To hasten on his expedition.
                                     Exeunt ANTONIO and PANTHINO
  PROTEUS. Thus have I shunn'd the fire for fear of burning,
    And drench'd me in the sea, where I am drown'd.
    I fear'd to show my father Julia's letter,
    Lest he should take exceptions to my love;
    And with the vantage of mine own excuse
    Hath he excepted most against my love.
    O, how this spring of love resembleth
    The uncertain glory of an April day,
    Which now shows all the beauty of the sun,
    And by an by a cloud takes all away!

                       Re-enter PANTHINO

  PANTHINO. Sir Proteus, your father calls for you;
    He is in haste; therefore, I pray you, go.
  PROTEUS. Why, this it is: my heart accords thereto;
    And yet a thousand times it answers 'No.'             Exeunt

ACT II. SCENE I. Milan. The DUKE'S palace

Enter VALENTINE and SPEED

  SPEED. Sir, your glove.
  VALENTINE. Not mine: my gloves are on.
  SPEED. Why, then, this may be yours; for this is but one.
  VALENTINE. Ha! let me see; ay, give it me, it's mine;
    Sweet ornament that decks a thing divine!
    Ah, Silvia! Silvia!
  SPEED.  [Calling]  Madam Silvia! Madam Silvia!
  VALENTINE. How now, sirrah?
  SPEED. She is not within hearing, sir.
  VALENTINE. Why, sir, who bade you call her?
  SPEED. Your worship, sir; or else I mistook.
  VALENTINE. Well, you'll still be too forward.
  SPEED. And yet I was last chidden for being too slow.
  VALENTINE. Go to, sir; tell me, do you know Madam Silvia?
  SPEED. She that your worship loves?
  VALENTINE. Why, how know you that I am in love?
  SPEED. Marry, by these special marks: first, you have learn'd, like
    Sir Proteus, to wreath your arms like a malcontent; to relish a
    love-song, like a robin redbreast; to walk alone, like one that
    had the pestilence; to sigh, like a school-boy that had lost his
    A B C; to weep, like a young wench that had buried her grandam;
    to fast, like one that takes diet; to watch, like one that fears
    robbing; to speak puling, like a beggar at Hallowmas. You were
    wont, when you laughed, to crow like a cock; when you walk'd, to
    walk like one of the lions; when you fasted, it was presently
    after dinner; when you look'd sadly, it was for want of money.
    And now you are metamorphis'd with a mistress, that, when I look
    on you, I can hardly think you my master.
  VALENTINE. Are all these things perceiv'd in me?
  SPEED. They are all perceiv'd without ye.
  VALENTINE. Without me? They cannot.
  SPEED. Without you! Nay, that's certain; for, without you were so
    simple, none else would; but you are so without these follies
    that these follies are within you, and shine through you like the
    water in an urinal, that not an eye that sees you but is a
    physician to comment on your malady.
  VALENTINE. But tell me, dost thou know my lady Silvia?
  SPEED. She that you gaze on so, as she sits at supper?
  VALENTINE. Hast thou observ'd that? Even she, I mean.
  SPEED. Why, sir, I know her not.
  VALENTINE. Dost thou know her by my gazing on her, and yet know'st
    her not?
  SPEED. Is she not hard-favour'd, sir?
  VALENTINE. Not so fair, boy, as well-favour'd.
  SPEED. Sir, I know that well enough.
  VALENTINE. What dost thou know?
  SPEED. That she is not so fair as, of you, well-favour'd.
  VALENTINE. I mean that her beauty is exquisite, but her favour
    infinite.
  SPEED. That's because the one is painted, and the other out of all
    count.
  VALENTINE. How painted? and how out of count?
  SPEED. Marry, sir, so painted, to make her fair, that no man counts
    of her beauty.
  VALENTINE. How esteem'st thou me? I account of her beauty.
  SPEED. You never saw her since she was deform'd.
  VALENTINE. How long hath she been deform'd?
  SPEED. Ever since you lov'd her.
  VALENTINE. I have lov'd her ever since I saw her, and still
    I see her beautiful.
  SPEED. If you love her, you cannot see her.
  VALENTINE. Why?
  SPEED. Because Love is blind. O that you had mine eyes; or your own
    eyes had the lights they were wont to have when you chid at Sir
    Proteus for going ungarter'd!
  VALENTINE. What should I see then?
  SPEED. Your own present folly and her passing deformity; for he,
    being in love, could not see to garter his hose; and you, being
    in love, cannot see to put on your hose.
  VALENTINE. Belike, boy, then you are in love; for last morning you
    could not see to wipe my shoes.
  SPEED. True, sir; I was in love with my bed. I thank you, you
    swing'd me for my love, which makes me the bolder to chide you
    for yours.
  VALENTINE. In conclusion, I stand affected to her.
  SPEED. I would you were set, so your affection would cease.
  VALENTINE. Last night she enjoin'd me to write some lines to one
    she loves.
  SPEED. And have you?
  VALENTINE. I have.
  SPEED. Are they not lamely writ?
  VALENTINE. No, boy, but as well as I can do them.

                           Enter SILVIA

    Peace! here she comes.
  SPEED.  [Aside]  O excellent motion! O exceeding puppet!
    Now will he interpret to her.
  VALENTINE. Madam and mistress, a thousand good morrows.
  SPEED.  [Aside]  O, give ye good ev'n!
    Here's a million of manners.
  SILVIA. Sir Valentine and servant, to you two thousand.
  SPEED.  [Aside]  He should give her interest, and she gives it him.
  VALENTINE. As you enjoin'd me, I have writ your letter
    Unto the secret nameless friend of yours;
    Which I was much unwilling to proceed in,
    But for my duty to your ladyship.
  SILVIA. I thank you, gentle servant. 'Tis very clerkly done.
  VALENTINE. Now trust me, madam, it came hardly off;
    For, being ignorant to whom it goes,
    I writ at random, very doubtfully.
  SILVIA. Perchance you think too much of so much pains?
  VALENTINE. No, madam; so it stead you, I will write,
    Please you command, a thousand times as much;
    And yet-
  SILVIA. A pretty period! Well, I guess the sequel;
    And yet I will not name it- and yet I care not.
    And yet take this again- and yet I thank you-
    Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.
  SPEED.  [Aside]  And yet you will; and yet another' yet.'
  VALENTINE. What means your ladyship? Do you not like it?
  SILVIA. Yes, yes; the lines are very quaintly writ;
    But, since unwillingly, take them again.
    Nay, take them.                      [Gives hack the letter]
  VALENTINE. Madam, they are for you.
  SILVIA. Ay, ay, you writ them, sir, at my request;
    But I will none of them; they are for you:
    I would have had them writ more movingly.
  VALENTINE. Please you, I'll write your ladyship another.
  SILVIA. And when it's writ, for my sake read it over;
    And if it please you, so; if not, why, so.
  VALENTINE. If it please me, madam, what then?
  SILVIA. Why, if it please you, take it for your labour.
    And so good morrow, servant.                     Exit SILVIA
  SPEED. O jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible,
    As a nose on a man's face, or a weathercock on a steeple!
    My master sues to her; and she hath taught her suitor,
    He being her pupil, to become her tutor.
    O excellent device! Was there ever heard a better,
    That my master, being scribe, to himself should write the letter?
  VALENTINE. How now, sir! What are you reasoning with yourself?
  SPEED. Nay, I was rhyming: 'tis you that have the reason.
  VALENTINE. To do what?
  SPEED. To be a spokesman from Madam Silvia?
  VALENTINE. To whom?
  SPEED. To yourself; why, she woos you by a figure.
  VALENTINE. What figure?
  SPEED. By a letter, I should say.
  VALENTINE. Why, she hath not writ to me.
  SPEED. What need she, when she hath made you write to yourself?
    Why, do you not perceive the jest?
  VALENTINE. No, believe me.
  SPEED. No believing you indeed, sir. But did you perceive her
    earnest?
  VALENTINE. She gave me none except an angry word.
  SPEED. Why, she hath given you a letter.
  VALENTINE. That's the letter I writ to her friend.
  SPEED. And that letter hath she deliver'd, and there an end.
  VALENTINE. I would it were no worse.
  SPEED. I'll warrant you 'tis as well.
    'For often have you writ to her; and she, in modesty,
    Or else for want of idle time, could not again reply;
    Or fearing else some messenger that might her mind discover,
    Herself hath taught her love himself to write unto her lover.'
    All this I speak in print, for in print I found it. Why muse you,
    sir? 'Tis dinner time.
  VALENTINE. I have din'd.
  SPEED. Ay, but hearken, sir; though the chameleon Love can feed on
    the air, I am one that am nourish'd by my victuals, and would
    fain have meat. O, be not like your mistress! Be moved, be moved.
                                                          Exeunt

SCENE II. Verona. JULIA'S house

Enter PROTEUS and JULIA

  PROTEUS. Have patience, gentle Julia.
  JULIA. I must, where is no remedy.
  PROTEUS. When possibly I can, I will return.
  JULIA. If you turn not, you will return the sooner.
    Keep this remembrance for thy Julia's sake.
                                                 [Giving a ring]
  PROTEUS. Why, then, we'll make exchange. Here, take you this.
  JULIA. And seal the bargain with a holy kiss.
  PROTEUS. Here is my hand for my true constancy;
    And when that hour o'erslips me in the day
    Wherein I sigh not, Julia, for thy sake,
    The next ensuing hour some foul mischance
    Torment me for my love's forgetfulness!
    My father stays my coming; answer not;
    The tide is now- nay, not thy tide of tears:
    That tide will stay me longer than I should.
    Julia, farewell!                                  Exit JULIA
    What, gone without a word?
    Ay, so true love should do: it cannot speak;
    For truth hath better deeds than words to grace it.

                          Enter PANTHINO

  PANTHINO. Sir Proteus, you are stay'd for.
  PROTEUS. Go; I come, I come.
    Alas! this parting strikes poor lovers dumb.          Exeunt

SCENE III. Verona. A street

Enter LAUNCE, leading a dog

  LAUNCE. Nay, 'twill be this hour ere I have done weeping; all the
  kind of the Launces have this very fault. I have receiv'd my
  proportion, like the Prodigious Son, and am going with Sir Proteus to
  the Imperial's court. I think Crab my dog be the sourest-natured dog
  that lives: my mother weeping, my father wailing, my sister crying,
  our maid howling, our cat wringing her hands, and all our house in a
  great perplexity; yet did not this cruel-hearted cur shed one tear.
  He is a stone, a very pebble stone, and has no more pity in him than
  a dog. A Jew would have wept to have seen our parting; why, my
  grandam having no eyes, look you, wept herself blind at my parting.
  Nay, I'll show you the manner of it. This shoe is my father; no, this
  left shoe is my father; no, no, left shoe is my mother; nay, that
  cannot be so neither; yes, it is so, it is so, it hath the worser
  sole. This shoe with the hole in it is my mother, and this my father.
  A vengeance on 't! There 'tis. Now, sir, this staff is my sister,
  for, look you, she is as white as a lily and as small as a wand; this
  hat is Nan our maid; I am the dog; no, the dog is himself, and I am
  the dog- O, the dog is me, and I am myself; ay, so, so. Now come I to
  my father: 'Father, your blessing.' Now should not the shoe speak a
  word for weeping; now should I kiss my father; well, he weeps on. Now
  come I to my mother. O that she could speak now like a wood woman!
  Well, I kiss her- why there 'tis; here's my mother's breath up and
  down. Now come I to my sister; mark the moan she makes. Now the dog
  all this while sheds not a tear, nor speaks a word; but see how I lay
  the dust with my tears.

                            Enter PANTHINO

  PANTHINO. Launce, away, away, aboard! Thy master is shipp'd, and
    thou art to post after with oars. What's the matter? Why weep'st
    thou, man? Away, ass! You'll lose the tide if you tarry any
    longer.
  LAUNCE. It is no matter if the tied were lost; for it is the
    unkindest tied that ever any man tied.
  PANTHINO. What's the unkindest tide?
  LAUNCE. Why, he that's tied here, Crab, my dog.
  PANTHINO. Tut, man, I mean thou'lt lose the flood, and, in losing
    the flood, lose thy voyage, and, in losing thy voyage, lose thy
    master, and, in losing thy master, lose thy service, and, in
    losing thy service- Why dost thou stop my mouth?
  LAUNCE. For fear thou shouldst lose thy tongue.
  PANTHINO. Where should I lose my tongue?
  LAUNCE. In thy tale.
  PANTHINO. In thy tail!
  LAUNCE. Lose the tide, and the voyage, and the master, and the
    service, and the tied! Why, man, if the river were dry, I am able
    to fill it with my tears; if the wind were down, I could drive
    the boat with my sighs.
  PANTHINO. Come, come away, man; I was sent to call thee.
  LAUNCE. Sir, call me what thou dar'st.
  PANTHINO. Will thou go?
  LAUNCE. Well, I will go.                                Exeunt

SCENE IV. Milan. The DUKE'S palace

Enter SILVIA, VALENTINE, THURIO, and SPEED

  SILVIA. Servant!
  VALENTINE. Mistress?
  SPEED. Master, Sir Thurio frowns on you.
  VALENTINE. Ay, boy, it's for love.
  SPEED. Not of you.
  VALENTINE. Of my mistress, then.
  SPEED. 'Twere good you knock'd him.                       Exit
  SILVIA. Servant, you are sad.
  VALENTINE. Indeed, madam, I seem so.
  THURIO. Seem you that you are not?
  VALENTINE. Haply I do.
  THURIO. So do counterfeits.
  VALENTINE. So do you.
  THURIO. What seem I that I am not?
  VALENTINE. Wise.
  THURIO. What instance of the contrary?
  VALENTINE. Your folly.
  THURIO. And how quote you my folly?
  VALENTINE. I quote it in your jerkin.
  THURIO. My jerkin is a doublet.
  VALENTINE. Well, then, I'll double your folly.
  THURIO. How?
  SILVIA. What, angry, Sir Thurio! Do you change colour?
  VALENTINE. Give him leave, madam; he is a kind of chameleon.
  THURIO. That hath more mind to feed on your blood than live in your
    air.
  VALENTINE. You have said, sir.
  THURIO. Ay, sir, and done too, for this time.
  VALENTINE. I know it well, sir; you always end ere you begin.
  SILVIA. A fine volley of words, gentlemen, and quickly shot off.
  VALENTINE. 'Tis indeed, madam; we thank the giver.
  SILVIA. Who is that, servant?
  VALENTINE. Yourself, sweet lady; for you gave the fire. Sir Thurio
    borrows his wit from your ladyship's looks, and spends what he
    borrows kindly in your company.
  THURIO. Sir, if you spend word for word with me, I shall make your
    wit bankrupt.
  VALENTINE. I know it well, sir; you have an exchequer of words,
    and, I think, no other treasure to give your followers; for it
    appears by their bare liveries that they live by your bare words.

                             Enter DUKE

  SILVIA. No more, gentlemen, no more. Here comes my father.
  DUKE. Now, daughter Silvia, you are hard beset.
    Sir Valentine, your father is in good health.
    What say you to a letter from your friends
    Of much good news?
  VALENTINE. My lord, I will be thankful
    To any happy messenger from thence.
  DUKE. Know ye Don Antonio, your countryman?
  VALENTINE. Ay, my good lord, I know the gentleman
    To be of worth and worthy estimation,
    And not without desert so well reputed.
  DUKE. Hath he not a son?
  VALENTINE. Ay, my good lord; a son that well deserves
    The honour and regard of such a father.
  DUKE. You know him well?
  VALENTINE. I knew him as myself; for from our infancy
    We have convers'd and spent our hours together;
    And though myself have been an idle truant,
    Omitting the sweet benefit of time
    To clothe mine age with angel-like perfection,
    Yet hath Sir Proteus, for that's his name,
    Made use and fair advantage of his days:
    His years but young, but his experience old;
    His head unmellowed, but his judgment ripe;
    And, in a word, for far behind his worth
    Comes all the praises that I now bestow,
    He is complete in feature and in mind,
    With all good grace to grace a gentleman.
  DUKE. Beshrew me, sir, but if he make this good,
    He is as worthy for an empress' love
    As meet to be an emperor's counsellor.
    Well, sir, this gentleman is come to me
    With commendation from great potentates,
    And here he means to spend his time awhile.
    I think 'tis no unwelcome news to you.
  VALENTINE. Should I have wish'd a thing, it had been he.
  DUKE. Welcome him, then, according to his worth-
    Silvia, I speak to you, and you, Sir Thurio;
    For Valentine, I need not cite him to it.
    I will send him hither to you presently.           Exit DUKE
  VALENTINE. This is the gentleman I told your ladyship
    Had come along with me but that his mistresss
    Did hold his eyes lock'd in her crystal looks.
  SILVIA. Belike that now she hath enfranchis'd them
    Upon some other pawn for fealty.
  VALENTINE. Nay, sure, I think she holds them prisoners still.
  SILVIA. Nay, then, he should be blind; and, being blind,
    How could he see his way to seek out you?
  VALENTINE. Why, lady, Love hath twenty pair of eyes.
  THURIO. They say that Love hath not an eye at all.
  VALENTINE. To see such lovers, Thurio, as yourself;
    Upon a homely object Love can wink.              Exit THURIO

                         Enter PROTEUS

  SILVIA. Have done, have done; here comes the gentleman.
  VALENTINE. Welcome, dear Proteus! Mistress, I beseech you
    Confirm his welcome with some special favour.
  SILVIA. His worth is warrant for his welcome hither,
    If this be he you oft have wish'd to hear from.
  VALENTINE. Mistress, it is; sweet lady, entertain him
    To be my fellow-servant to your ladyship.
  SILVIA. Too low a mistress for so high a servant.
  PROTEUS. Not so, sweet lady; but too mean a servant
    To have a look of such a worthy mistress.
  VALENTINE. Leave off discourse of disability;
    Sweet lady, entertain him for your servant.
  PROTEUS. My duty will I boast of, nothing else.
  SILVIA. And duty never yet did want his meed.
    Servant, you are welcome to a worthless mistress.
  PROTEUS. I'll die on him that says so but yourself.
  SILVIA. That you are welcome?
  PROTEUS. That you are worthless.

                          Re-enter THURIO

  THURIO. Madam, my lord your father would speak with you.
  SILVIA. I wait upon his pleasure. Come, Sir Thurio,
    Go with me. Once more, new servant, welcome.
    I'll leave you to confer of home affairs;
    When you have done we look to hear from you.
  PROTEUS. We'll both attend upon your ladyship.
                                        Exeunt SILVIA and THURIO
  VALENTINE. Now, tell me, how do all from whence you came?
  PROTEUS. Your friends are well, and have them much commended.
  VALENTINE. And how do yours?
  PROTEUS. I left them all in health.
  VALENTINE. How does your lady, and how thrives your love?
  PROTEUS. My tales of love were wont to weary you;
    I know you joy not in a love-discourse.
  VALENTINE. Ay, Proteus, but that life is alter'd now;
    I have done penance for contemning Love,
    Whose high imperious thoughts have punish'd me
    With bitter fasts, with penitential groans,
    With nightly tears, and daily heart-sore sighs;
    For, in revenge of my contempt of love,
    Love hath chas'd sleep from my enthralled eyes
    And made them watchers of mine own heart's sorrow.
    O gentle Proteus, Love's a mighty lord,
    And hath so humbled me as I confess
    There is no woe to his correction,
    Nor to his service no such joy on earth.
    Now no discourse, except it be of love;
    Now can I break my fast, dine, sup, and sleep,
    Upon the very naked name of love.
  PROTEUS. Enough; I read your fortune in your eye.
    Was this the idol that you worship so?
  VALENTINE. Even she; and is she not a heavenly saint?
  PROTEUS. No; but she is an earthly paragon.
  VALENTINE. Call her divine.
  PROTEUS. I will not flatter her.
  VALENTINE. O, flatter me; for love delights in praises!
  PROTEUS. When I was sick you gave me bitter pills,
    And I must minister the like to you.
  VALENTINE. Then speak the truth by her; if not divine,
    Yet let her be a principality,
    Sovereign to all the creatures on the earth.
  PROTEUS. Except my mistress.
  VALENTINE. Sweet, except not any;
    Except thou wilt except against my love.
  PROTEUS. Have I not reason to prefer mine own?
  VALENTINE. And I will help thee to prefer her too:
    She shall be dignified with this high honour-
    To bear my lady's train, lest the base earth
    Should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss
    And, of so great a favour growing proud,
    Disdain to root the summer-swelling flow'r
    And make rough winter everlastingly.
  PROTEUS. Why, Valentine, what braggardism is this?
  VALENTINE. Pardon me, Proteus; all I can is nothing
    To her, whose worth makes other worthies nothing;
    She is alone.
  PROTEUS. Then let her alone.
  VALENTINE. Not for the world! Why, man, she is mine own;
    And I as rich in having such a jewel
    As twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl,
    The water nectar, and the rocks pure gold.
    Forgive me that I do not dream on thee,
    Because thou seest me dote upon my love.
    My foolish rival, that her father likes
    Only for his possessions are so huge,
    Is gone with her along; and I must after,
    For love, thou know'st, is full of jealousy.
  PROTEUS. But she loves you?
  VALENTINE. Ay, and we are betroth'd; nay more, our marriage-hour,
    With all the cunning manner of our flight,
    Determin'd of- how I must climb her window,
    The ladder made of cords, and all the means
    Plotted and 'greed on for my happiness.
    Good Proteus, go with me to my chamber,
    In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel.
  PROTEUS. Go on before; I shall enquire you forth;
    I must unto the road to disembark
    Some necessaries that I needs must use;
    And then I'll presently attend you.
  VALENTINE. Will you make haste?
  PROTEUS. I will.                                Exit VALENTINE
    Even as one heat another heat expels
    Or as one nail by strength drives out another,
    So the remembrance of my former love
    Is by a newer object quite forgotten.
    Is it my mind, or Valentinus' praise,
    Her true perfection, or my false transgression,
    That makes me reasonless to reason thus?
    She is fair; and so is Julia that I love-
    That I did love, for now my love is thaw'd;
    Which like a waxen image 'gainst a fire
    Bears no impression of the thing it was.
    Methinks my zeal to Valentine is cold,
    And that I love him not as I was wont.
    O! but I love his lady too too much,
    And that's the reason I love him so little.
    How shall I dote on her with more advice
    That thus without advice begin to love her!
    'Tis but her picture I have yet beheld,
    And that hath dazzled my reason's light;
    But when I look on her perfections,
    There is no reason but I shall be blind.
    If I can check my erring love, I will;
    If not, to compass her I'll use my skill.               Exit

SCENE V. Milan. A street

Enter SPEED and LAUNCE severally

  SPEED. Launce! by mine honesty, welcome to Padua.
  LAUNCE. Forswear not thyself, sweet youth, for I am not welcome. I
    reckon this always, that a man is never undone till he be hang'd,
    nor never welcome to a place till some certain shot be paid, and
    the hostess say 'Welcome!'
  SPEED. Come on, you madcap; I'll to the alehouse with you
    presently; where, for one shot of five pence, thou shalt have
    five thousand welcomes. But, sirrah, how did thy master part with
    Madam Julia?
  LAUNCE. Marry, after they clos'd in earnest, they parted very
    fairly in jest.
  SPEED. But shall she marry him?
  LAUNCE. No.
  SPEED. How then? Shall he marry her?
  LAUNCE. No, neither.
  SPEED. What, are they broken?
  LAUNCE. No, they are both as whole as a fish.
  SPEED. Why then, how stands the matter with them?
  LAUNCE. Marry, thus: when it stands well with him, it stands well
    with her.
  SPEED. What an ass art thou! I understand thee not.
  LAUNCE. What a block art thou that thou canst not! My staff
    understands me.
  SPEED. What thou say'st?
  LAUNCE. Ay, and what I do too; look thee, I'll but lean, and my
    staff understands me.
  SPEED. It stands under thee, indeed.
  LAUNCE. Why, stand-under and under-stand is all one.
  SPEED. But tell me true, will't be a match?
  LAUNCE. Ask my dog. If he say ay, it will; if he say no, it will;
    if he shake his tail and say nothing, it will.
  SPEED. The conclusion is, then, that it will.
  LAUNCE. Thou shalt never get such a secret from me but by a
    parable.
  SPEED. 'Tis well that I get it so. But, Launce, how say'st thou
    that my master is become a notable lover?
  LAUNCE. I never knew him otherwise.
  SPEED. Than how?
  LAUNCE. A notable lubber, as thou reportest him to be.
  SPEED. Why, thou whoreson ass, thou mistak'st me.
  LAUNCE. Why, fool, I meant not thee, I meant thy master.
  SPEED. I tell thee my master is become a hot lover.
  LAUNCE. Why, I tell thee I care not though he burn himself in love.
    If thou wilt, go with me to the alehouse; if not, thou art an
    Hebrew, a Jew, and not worth the name of a Christian.
  SPEED. Why?
  LAUNCE. Because thou hast not so much charity in thee as to go to
    the ale with a Christian. Wilt thou go?
  SPEED. At thy service.                                  Exeunt

SCENE VI. Milan. The DUKE's palace

Enter PROTEUS

  PROTEUS. To leave my Julia, shall I be forsworn;
    To love fair Silvia, shall I be forsworn;
    To wrong my friend, I shall be much forsworn;
    And ev'n that pow'r which gave me first my oath
    Provokes me to this threefold perjury:
    Love bade me swear, and Love bids me forswear.
    O sweet-suggesting Love, if thou hast sinn'd,
    Teach me, thy tempted subject, to excuse it!
    At first I did adore a twinkling star,
    But now I worship a celestial sun.
    Unheedful vows may heedfully be broken;
    And he wants wit that wants resolved will
    To learn his wit t' exchange the bad for better.
    Fie, fie, unreverend tongue, to call her bad
    Whose sovereignty so oft thou hast preferr'd
    With twenty thousand soul-confirming oaths!
    I cannot leave to love, and yet I do;
    But there I leave to love where I should love.
    Julia I lose, and Valentine I lose;
    If I keep them, I needs must lose myself;
    If I lose them, thus find I by their loss:
    For Valentine, myself; for Julia, Silvia.
    I to myself am dearer than a friend;
    For love is still most precious in itself;
    And Silvia- witness heaven, that made her fair!-
    Shows Julia but a swarthy Ethiope.
    I will forget that Julia is alive,
    Rememb'ring that my love to her is dead;
    And Valentine I'll hold an enemy,
    Aiming at Silvia as a sweeter friend.
    I cannot now prove constant to myself
    Without some treachery us'd to Valentine.
    This night he meaneth with a corded ladder
    To climb celestial Silvia's chamber window,
    Myself in counsel, his competitor.
    Now presently I'll give her father notice
    Of their disguising and pretended flight,
    Who, all enrag'd, will banish Valentine,
    For Thurio, he intends, shall wed his daughter;
    But, Valentine being gone, I'll quickly cross
    By some sly trick blunt Thurio's dull proceeding.
    Love, lend me wings to make my purpose swift,
    As thou hast lent me wit to plot this drift.            Exit

SCENE VII. Verona. JULIA'S house

Enter JULIA and LUCETTA

  JULIA. Counsel, Lucetta; gentle girl, assist me;
    And, ev'n in kind love, I do conjure thee,
    Who art the table wherein all my thoughts
    Are visibly character'd and engrav'd,
    To lesson me and tell me some good mean
    How, with my honour, I may undertake
    A journey to my loving Proteus.
  LUCETTA. Alas, the way is wearisome and long!
  JULIA. A true-devoted pilgrim is not weary
    To measure kingdoms with his feeble steps;
    Much less shall she that hath Love's wings to fly,
    And when the flight is made to one so dear,
    Of such divine perfection, as Sir Proteus.
  LUCETTA. Better forbear till Proteus make return.
  JULIA. O, know'st thou not his looks are my soul's food?
    Pity the dearth that I have pined in
    By longing for that food so long a time.
    Didst thou but know the inly touch of love.
    Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow
    As seek to quench the fire of love with words.
  LUCETTA. I do not seek to quench your love's hot fire,
    But qualify the fire's extreme rage,
    Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.
  JULIA. The more thou dam'st it up, the more it burns.
    The current that with gentle murmur glides,
    Thou know'st, being stopp'd, impatiently doth rage;
    But when his fair course is not hindered,
    He makes sweet music with th' enamell'd stones,
    Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge
    He overtaketh in his pilgrimage;
    And so by many winding nooks he strays,
    With willing sport, to the wild ocean.
    Then let me go, and hinder not my course.
    I'll be as patient as a gentle stream,
    And make a pastime of each weary step,
    Till the last step have brought me to my love;
    And there I'll rest as, after much turmoil,
    A blessed soul doth in Elysium.
  LUCETTA. But in what habit will you go along?
  JULIA. Not like a woman, for I would prevent
    The loose encounters of lascivious men;
    Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds
    As may beseem some well-reputed page.
  LUCETTA. Why then, your ladyship must cut your hair.
  JULIA. No, girl; I'll knit it up in silken strings
    With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots-
    To be fantastic may become a youth
    Of greater time than I shall show to be.
  LUCETTA. What fashion, madam, shall I make your breeches?
  JULIA. That fits as well as 'Tell me, good my lord,
    What compass will you wear your farthingale.'
    Why ev'n what fashion thou best likes, Lucetta.
  LUCETTA. You must needs have them with a codpiece, madam.
  JULIA. Out, out, Lucetta, that will be ill-favour'd.
  LUCETTA. A round hose, madam, now's not worth a pin,
    Unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.
  JULIA. Lucetta, as thou lov'st me, let me have
    What thou think'st meet, and is most mannerly.
    But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me
    For undertaking so unstaid a journey?
    I fear me it will make me scandaliz'd.
  LUCETTA. If you think so, then stay at home and go not.
  JULIA. Nay, that I will not.
  LUCETTA. Then never dream on infamy, but go.
    If Proteus like your journey when you come,
    No matter who's displeas'd when you are gone.
    I fear me he will scarce be pleas'd withal.
  JULIA. That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear:
    A thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears,
    And instances of infinite of love,
    Warrant me welcome to my Proteus.
  LUCETTA. All these are servants to deceitful men.
  JULIA. Base men that use them to so base effect!
    But truer stars did govern Proteus' birth;
    His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles,
    His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate,
    His tears pure messengers sent from his heart,
    His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth.
  LUCETTA. Pray heav'n he prove so when you come to him.
  JULIA. Now, as thou lov'st me, do him not that wrong
    To bear a hard opinion of his truth;
    Only deserve my love by loving him.
    And presently go with me to my chamber,
    To take a note of what I stand in need of
    To furnish me upon my longing journey.
    All that is mine I leave at thy dispose,
    My goods, my lands, my reputation;
    Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence.
    Come, answer not, but to it presently;
    I am impatient of my tarriance.                       Exeunt

ACT III. SCENE I. Milan. The DUKE'S palace

Enter DUKE, THURIO, and PROTEUS

  DUKE. Sir Thurio, give us leave, I pray, awhile;
    We have some secrets to confer about.            Exit THURIO
    Now tell me, Proteus, what's your will with me?
  PROTEUS. My gracious lord, that which I would discover
    The law of friendship bids me to conceal;
    But, when I call to mind your gracious favours
    Done to me, undeserving as I am,
    My duty pricks me on to utter that
    Which else no worldly good should draw from me.
    Know, worthy prince, Sir Valentine, my friend,
    This night intends to steal away your daughter;
    Myself am one made privy to the plot.
    I know you have determin'd to bestow her
    On Thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates;
    And should she thus be stol'n away from you,
    It would be much vexation to your age.
    Thus, for my duty's sake, I rather chose
    To cross my friend in his intended drift
    Than, by concealing it, heap on your head
    A pack of sorrows which would press you down,
    Being unprevented, to your timeless grave.
  DUKE. Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest care,
    Which to requite, command me while I live.
    This love of theirs myself have often seen,
    Haply when they have judg'd me fast asleep,
    And oftentimes have purpos'd to forbid
    Sir Valentine her company and my court;
    But, fearing lest my jealous aim might err
    And so, unworthily, disgrace the man,
    A rashness that I ever yet have shunn'd,
    I gave him gentle looks, thereby to find
    That which thyself hast now disclos'd to me.
    And, that thou mayst perceive my fear of this,
    Knowing that tender youth is soon suggested,
    I nightly lodge her in an upper tow'r,
    The key whereof myself have ever kept;
    And thence she cannot be convey'd away.
  PROTEUS. Know, noble lord, they have devis'd a mean
    How he her chamber window will ascend
    And with a corded ladder fetch her down;
    For which the youthful lover now is gone,
    And this way comes he with it presently;
    Where, if it please you, you may intercept him.
    But, good my lord, do it so cunningly
    That my discovery be not aimed at;
    For love of you, not hate unto my friend,
    Hath made me publisher of this pretence.
  DUKE. Upon mine honour, he shall never know
    That I had any light from thee of this.
  PROTEUS. Adieu, my lord; Sir Valentine is coming.         Exit

                        Enter VALENTINE

  DUKE. Sir Valentine, whither away so fast?
  VALENTINE. Please it your Grace, there is a messenger
    That stays to bear my letters to my friends,
    And I am going to deliver them.
  DUKE. Be they of much import?
  VALENTINE. The tenour of them doth but signify
    My health and happy being at your court.
  DUKE. Nay then, no matter; stay with me awhile;
    I am to break with thee of some affairs
    That touch me near, wherein thou must be secret.
    'Tis not unknown to thee that I have sought
    To match my friend Sir Thurio to my daughter.
  VALENTINE. I know it well, my lord; and, sure, the match
    Were rich and honourable; besides, the gentleman
    Is full of virtue, bounty, worth, and qualities
    Beseeming such a wife as your fair daughter.
    Cannot your grace win her to fancy him?
  DUKE. No, trust me; she is peevish, sullen, froward,
    Proud, disobedient, stubborn, lacking duty;
    Neither regarding that she is my child
    Nor fearing me as if I were her father;
    And, may I say to thee, this pride of hers,
    Upon advice, hath drawn my love from her;
    And, where I thought the remnant of mine age
    Should have been cherish'd by her childlike duty,
    I now am full resolv'd to take a wife
    And turn her out to who will take her in.
    Then let her beauty be her wedding-dow'r;
    For me and my possessions she esteems not.
  VALENTINE. What would your Grace have me to do in this?
  DUKE. There is a lady, in Verona here,
    Whom I affect; but she is nice, and coy,
    And nought esteems my aged eloquence.
    Now, therefore, would I have thee to my tutor-
    For long agone I have forgot to court;
    Besides, the fashion of the time is chang'd-
    How and which way I may bestow myself
    To be regarded in her sun-bright eye.
  VALENTINE. Win her with gifts, if she respect not words:
    Dumb jewels often in their silent kind
    More than quick words do move a woman's mind.
  DUKE. But she did scorn a present that I sent her.
  VALENTINE. A woman sometime scorns what best contents her.
    Send her another; never give her o'er,
    For scorn at first makes after-love the more.
    If she do frown, 'tis not in hate of you,
    But rather to beget more love in you;
    If she do chide, 'tis not to have you gone,
    For why, the fools are mad if left alone.
    Take no repulse, whatever she doth say;
    For 'Get you gone' she doth not mean 'Away!'
    Flatter and praise, commend, extol their graces;
    Though ne'er so black, say they have angels' faces.
    That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man,
    If with his tongue he cannot win a woman.
  DUKE. But she I mean is promis'd by her friends
    Unto a youthful gentleman of worth;
    And kept severely from resort of men,
    That no man hath access by day to her.
  VALENTINE. Why then I would resort to her by night.
  DUKE. Ay, but the doors be lock'd and keys kept safe,
    That no man hath recourse to her by night.
  VALENTINE. What lets but one may enter at her window?
  DUKE. Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground,
    And built so shelving that one cannot climb it
    Without apparent hazard of his life.
  VALENTINE. Why then a ladder, quaintly made of cords,
    To cast up with a pair of anchoring hooks,
    Would serve to scale another Hero's tow'r,
    So bold Leander would adventure it.
  DUKE. Now, as thou art a gentleman of blood,
    Advise me where I may have such a ladder.
  VALENTINE. When would you use it? Pray, sir, tell me that.
  DUKE. This very night; for Love is like a child,
    That longs for everything that he can come by.
  VALENTINE. By seven o'clock I'll get you such a ladder.
  DUKE. But, hark thee; I will go to her alone;
    How shall I best convey the ladder thither?
  VALENTINE. It will be light, my lord, that you may bear it
    Under a cloak that is of any length.
  DUKE. A cloak as long as thine will serve the turn?
  VALENTINE. Ay, my good lord.
  DUKE. Then let me see thy cloak.
    I'll get me one of such another length.
  VALENTINE. Why, any cloak will serve the turn, my lord.
  DUKE. How shall I fashion me to wear a cloak?
    I pray thee, let me feel thy cloak upon me.
    What letter is this same? What's here? 'To Silvia'!
    And here an engine fit for my proceeding!
    I'll be so bold to break the seal for once.          [Reads]
      'My thoughts do harbour with my Silvia nightly,
        And slaves they are to me, that send them flying.
      O, could their master come and go as lightly,
        Himself would lodge where, senseless, they are lying!
      My herald thoughts in thy pure bosom rest them,
        While I, their king, that thither them importune,
      Do curse the grace that with such grace hath blest them,
        Because myself do want my servants' fortune.
      I curse myself, for they are sent by me,
        That they should harbour where their lord should be.'
    What's here?
      'Silvia, this night I will enfranchise thee.'
    'Tis so; and here's the ladder for the purpose.
    Why, Phaethon- for thou art Merops' son-
    Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly car,
    And with thy daring folly burn the world?
    Wilt thou reach stars because they shine on thee?
    Go, base intruder, over-weening slave,
    Bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates;
    And think my patience, more than thy desert,
    Is privilege for thy departure hence.
    Thank me for this more than for all the favours
    Which, all too much, I have bestow'd on thee.
    But if thou linger in my territories
    Longer than swiftest expedition
    Will give thee time to leave our royal court,
    By heaven! my wrath shall far exceed the love
    I ever bore my daughter or thyself.
    Be gone; I will not hear thy vain excuse,
    But, as thou lov'st thy life, make speed from hence.    Exit
  VALENTINE. And why not death rather than living torment?
    To die is to be banish'd from myself,
    And Silvia is myself; banish'd from her
    Is self from self, a deadly banishment.
    What light is light, if Silvia be not seen?
    What joy is joy, if Silvia be not by?
    Unless it be to think that she is by,
    And feed upon the shadow of perfection.
    Except I be by Silvia in the night,
    There is no music in the nightingale;
    Unless I look on Silvia in the day,
    There is no day for me to look upon.
    She is my essence, and I leave to be
    If I be not by her fair influence
    Foster'd, illumin'd, cherish'd, kept alive.
    I fly not death, to fly his deadly doom:
    Tarry I here, I but attend on death;
    But fly I hence, I fly away from life.

                      Enter PROTEUS and LAUNCE

  PROTEUS. Run, boy, run, run, seek him out.
  LAUNCE. So-ho, so-ho!
  PROTEUS. What seest thou?
  LAUNCE. Him we go to find: there's not a hair on 's head but 'tis a
    Valentine.
  PROTEUS. Valentine?
  VALENTINE. No.
  PROTEUS. Who then? his spirit?
  VALENTINE. Neither.
  PROTEUS. What then?
  VALENTINE. Nothing.
  LAUNCE. Can nothing speak? Master, shall I strike?
  PROTEUS. Who wouldst thou strike?
  LAUNCE. Nothing.
  PROTEUS. Villain, forbear.
  LAUNCE. Why, sir, I'll strike nothing. I pray you-
  PROTEUS. Sirrah, I say, forbear. Friend Valentine, a word.
  VALENTINE. My ears are stopp'd and cannot hear good news,
    So much of bad already hath possess'd them.
  PROTEUS. Then in dumb silence will I bury mine,
    For they are harsh, untuneable, and bad.
  VALENTINE. Is Silvia dead?
  PROTEUS. No, Valentine.
  VALENTINE. No Valentine, indeed, for sacred Silvia.
    Hath she forsworn me?
  PROTEUS. No, Valentine.
  VALENTINE. No Valentine, if Silvia have forsworn me.
    What is your news?
  LAUNCE. Sir, there is a proclamation that you are vanished.
  PROTEUS. That thou art banished- O, that's the news!-
    From hence, from Silvia, and from me thy friend.
  VALENTINE. O, I have fed upon this woe already,
    And now excess of it will make me surfeit.
    Doth Silvia know that I am banished?
  PROTEUS. Ay, ay; and she hath offered to the doom-
    Which, unrevers'd, stands in effectual force-
    A sea of melting pearl, which some call tears;
    Those at her father's churlish feet she tender'd;
    With them, upon her knees, her humble self,
    Wringing her hands, whose whiteness so became them
    As if but now they waxed pale for woe.
    But neither bended knees, pure hands held up,
    Sad sighs, deep groans, nor silver-shedding tears,
    Could penetrate her uncompassionate sire-
    But Valentine, if he be ta'en, must die.
    Besides, her intercession chaf'd him so,
    When she for thy repeal was suppliant,
    That to close prison he commanded her,
    With many bitter threats of biding there.
  VALENTINE. No more; unless the next word that thou speak'st
    Have some malignant power upon my life:
    If so, I pray thee breathe it in mine ear,
    As ending anthem of my endless dolour.
  PROTEUS. Cease to lament for that thou canst not help,
    And study help for that which thou lament'st.
    Time is the nurse and breeder of all good.
    Here if thou stay thou canst not see thy love;
    Besides, thy staying will abridge thy life.
    Hope is a lover's staff; walk hence with that,
    And manage it against despairing thoughts.
    Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence,
    Which, being writ to me, shall be deliver'd
    Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love.
    The time now serves not to expostulate.
    Come, I'll convey thee through the city gate;
    And, ere I part with thee, confer at large
    Of all that may concern thy love affairs.
    As thou lov'st Silvia, though not for thyself,
    Regard thy danger, and along with me.
  VALENTINE. I pray thee, Launce, an if thou seest my boy,
    Bid him make haste and meet me at the Northgate.
  PROTEUS. Go, sirrah, find him out. Come, Valentine.
  VALENTINE. O my dear Silvia! Hapless Valentine!
                                    Exeunt VALENTINE and PROTEUS
  LAUNCE. I am but a fool, look you, and yet I have the wit to think
    my master is a kind of a knave; but that's all one if he be but
    one knave. He lives not now that knows me to be in love; yet I am
    in love; but a team of horse shall not pluck that from me; nor
    who 'tis I love; and yet 'tis a woman; but what woman I will not
    tell myself; and yet 'tis a milkmaid; yet 'tis not a maid, for
    she hath had gossips; yet 'tis a maid, for she is her master's
    maid and serves for wages. She hath more qualities than a
    water-spaniel- which is much in a bare Christian. Here is the
    cate-log  [Pulling out a paper]  of her condition. 'Inprimis: She
    can fetch and carry.' Why, a horse can do no more; nay, a horse
    cannot fetch, but only carry; therefore is she better than a
    jade. 'Item: She can milk.' Look you, a sweet virtue in a maid
    with clean hands.

                             Enter SPEED

  SPEED. How now, Signior Launce! What news with your mastership?
  LAUNCE. With my master's ship? Why, it is at sea.
  SPEED. Well, your old vice still: mistake the word. What news,
    then, in your paper?
  LAUNCE. The black'st news that ever thou heard'st.
  SPEED. Why, man? how black?
  LAUNCE. Why, as black as ink.
  SPEED. Let me read them.
  LAUNCE. Fie on thee, jolt-head; thou canst not read.
  SPEED. Thou liest; I can.
  LAUNCE. I will try thee. Tell me this: Who begot thee?
  SPEED. Marry, the son of my grandfather.
  LAUNCE. O illiterate loiterer. It was the son of thy grandmother.
    This proves that thou canst not read.
  SPEED. Come, fool, come; try me in thy paper.
  LAUNCE.  [Handing over the paper]  There; and Saint Nicholas be thy
    speed.
  SPEED.  [Reads]  'Inprimis: She can milk.'
  LAUNCE. Ay, that she can.
  SPEED. 'Item: She brews good ale.'
  LAUNCE. And thereof comes the proverb: Blessing of your heart, you
    brew good ale.
  SPEED. 'Item: She can sew.'
  LAUNCE. That's as much as to say 'Can she so?'
  SPEED. 'Item: She can knit.'
  LAUNCE. What need a man care for a stock with a wench, when she can
    knit him a stock.
  SPEED. 'Item: She can wash and scour.'
  LAUNCE. A special virtue; for then she need not be wash'd and
    scour'd.
  SPEED. 'Item: She can spin.'
  LAUNCE. Then may I set the world on wheels, when she can spin for
    her living.
  SPEED. 'Item: She hath many nameless virtues.'
  LAUNCE. That's as much as to say 'bastard virtues'; that indeed
    know not their fathers, and therefore have no names.
  SPEED. 'Here follow her vices.'
  LAUNCE. Close at the heels of her virtues.
  SPEED. 'Item: She is not to be kiss'd fasting, in respect of her
    breath.'
  LAUNCE. Well, that fault may be mended with a breakfast.
    Read on.
  SPEED. 'Item: She hath a sweet mouth.'
  LAUNCE. That makes amends for her sour breath.
  SPEED. 'Item: She doth talk in her sleep.'
  LAUNCE. It's no matter for that, so she sleep not in her talk.
  SPEED. 'Item: She is slow in words.'
  LAUNCE. O villain, that set this down among her vices! To be slow
    in words is a woman's only virtue. I pray thee, out with't; and
    place it for her chief virtue.
  SPEED. 'Item: She is proud.'
  LAUNCE. Out with that too; it was Eve's legacy, and cannot be ta'en
    from her.
  SPEED. 'Item: She hath no teeth.'
  LAUNCE. I care not for that neither, because I love crusts.
  SPEED. 'Item: She is curst.'
  LAUNCE. Well, the best is, she hath no teeth to bite.
  SPEED. 'Item: She will often praise her liquor.'
  LAUNCE. If her liquor be good, she shall; if she will not, I will;
    for good things should be praised.
  SPEED. 'Item: She is too liberal.'
  LAUNCE. Of her tongue she cannot, for that's writ down she is slow
    of; of her purse she shall not, for that I'll keep shut. Now of
    another thing she may, and that cannot I help. Well, proceed.
  SPEED. 'Item: She hath more hair than wit, and more faults
    than hairs, and more wealth than faults.'
  LAUNCE. Stop there; I'll have her; she was mine, and not mine,
    twice or thrice in that last article. Rehearse that once more.
  SPEED. 'Item: She hath more hair than wit'-
  LAUNCE. More hair than wit. It may be; I'll prove it: the cover of
    the salt hides the salt, and therefore it is more than the salt;
    the hair that covers the wit is more than the wit, for the
    greater hides the less. What's next?
  SPEED. 'And more faults than hairs'-
  LAUNCE. That's monstrous. O that that were out!
  SPEED. 'And more wealth than faults.'
  LAUNCE. Why, that word makes the faults gracious. Well, I'll have
    her; an if it be a match, as nothing is impossible-
  SPEED. What then?
  LAUNCE. Why, then will I tell thee- that thy master stays for thee
    at the Northgate.
  SPEED. For me?
  LAUNCE. For thee! ay, who art thou? He hath stay'd for a better man
    than thee.
  SPEED. And must I go to him?
  LAUNCE. Thou must run to him, for thou hast stay'd so long that
    going will scarce serve the turn.
  SPEED. Why didst not tell me sooner? Pox of your love letters!
 Exit
  LAUNCE. Now will he be swing'd for reading my letter. An unmannerly
    slave that will thrust himself into secrets! I'll after, to
    rejoice in the boy's correction.                        Exit

SCENE II. Milan. The DUKE'S palace

Enter DUKE and THURIO

  DUKE. Sir Thurio, fear not but that she will love you
    Now Valentine is banish'd from her sight.
  THURIO. Since his exile she hath despis'd me most,
    Forsworn my company and rail'd at me,
    That I am desperate of obtaining her.
  DUKE. This weak impress of love is as a figure
    Trenched in ice, which with an hour's heat
    Dissolves to water and doth lose his form.
    A little time will melt her frozen thoughts,
    And worthless Valentine shall be forgot.

                          Enter PROTEUS

    How now, Sir Proteus! Is your countryman,
    According to our proclamation, gone?
  PROTEUS. Gone, my good lord.
  DUKE. My daughter takes his going grievously.
  PROTEUS. A little time, my lord, will kill that grief.
  DUKE. So I believe; but Thurio thinks not so.
    Proteus, the good conceit I hold of thee-
    For thou hast shown some sign of good desert-
    Makes me the better to confer with thee.
  PROTEUS. Longer than I prove loyal to your Grace
    Let me not live to look upon your Grace.
  DUKE. Thou know'st how willingly I would effect
    The match between Sir Thurio and my daughter.
  PROTEUS. I do, my lord.
  DUKE. And also, I think, thou art not ignorant
    How she opposes her against my will.
  PROTEUS. She did, my lord, when Valentine was here.
  DUKE. Ay, and perversely she persevers so.
    What might we do to make the girl forget
    The love of Valentine, and love Sir Thurio?
  PROTEUS. The best way is to slander Valentine
    With falsehood, cowardice, and poor descent-
    Three things that women highly hold in hate.
  DUKE. Ay, but she'll think that it is spoke in hate.
  PROTEUS. Ay, if his enemy deliver it;
    Therefore it must with circumstance be spoken
    By one whom she esteemeth as his friend.
  DUKE. Then you must undertake to slander him.
  PROTEUS. And that, my lord, I shall be loath to do:
    'Tis an ill office for a gentleman,
    Especially against his very friend.
  DUKE. Where your good word cannot advantage him,
    Your slander never can endamage him;
    Therefore the office is indifferent,
    Being entreated to it by your friend.
  PROTEUS. You have prevail'd, my lord; if I can do it
    By aught that I can speak in his dispraise,
    She shall not long continue love to him.
    But say this weed her love from Valentine,
    It follows not that she will love Sir Thurio.
  THURIO. Therefore, as you unwind her love from him,
    Lest it should ravel and be good to none,
    You must provide to bottom it on me;
    Which must be done by praising me as much
    As you in worth dispraise Sir Valentine.
  DUKE. And, Proteus, we dare trust you in this kind,
    Because we know, on Valentine's report,
    You are already Love's firm votary
    And cannot soon revolt and change your mind.
    Upon this warrant shall you have access
    Where you with Silvia may confer at large-
    For she is lumpish, heavy, melancholy,
    And, for your friend's sake, will be glad of you-
    Where you may temper her by your persuasion
    To hate young Valentine and love my friend.
  PROTEUS. As much as I can do I will effect.
    But you, Sir Thurio, are not sharp enough;
    You must lay lime to tangle her desires
    By wailful sonnets, whose composed rhymes
    Should be full-fraught with serviceable vows.
  DUKE. Ay,
    Much is the force of heaven-bred poesy.
  PROTEUS. Say that upon the altar of her beauty
    You sacrifice your tears, your sighs, your heart;
    Write till your ink be dry, and with your tears
    Moist it again, and frame some feeling line
    That may discover such integrity;
    For Orpheus' lute was strung with poets' sinews,
    Whose golden touch could soften steel and stones,
    Make tigers tame, and huge leviathans
    Forsake unsounded deeps to dance on sands.
    After your dire-lamenting elegies,
    Visit by night your lady's chamber window
    With some sweet consort; to their instruments
    Tune a deploring dump- the night's dead silence
    Will well become such sweet-complaining grievance.
    This, or else nothing, will inherit her.
  DUKE. This discipline shows thou hast been in love.
  THURIO. And thy advice this night I'll put in practice;
    Therefore, sweet Proteus, my direction-giver,
    Let us into the city presently
    To sort some gentlemen well skill'd in music.
    I have a sonnet that will serve the turn
    To give the onset to thy good advice.
  DUKE. About it, gentlemen!
  PROTEUS. We'll wait upon your Grace till after supper,
    And afterward determine our proceedings.
  DUKE. Even now about it! I will pardon you.             Exeunt

ACT IV. SCENE I. The frontiers of Mantua. A forest

Enter certain OUTLAWS

  FIRST OUTLAW. Fellows, stand fast; I see a passenger.
  SECOND OUTLAW. If there be ten, shrink not, but down with 'em.

                  Enter VALENTINE and SPEED

  THIRD OUTLAW. Stand, sir, and throw us that you have about ye;
    If not, we'll make you sit, and rifle you.
  SPEED. Sir, we are undone; these are the villains
    That all the travellers do fear so much.
  VALENTINE. My friends-
  FIRST OUTLAW. That's not so, sir; we are your enemies.
  SECOND OUTLAW. Peace! we'll hear him.
  THIRD OUTLAW. Ay, by my beard, will we; for he is a proper man.
  VALENTINE. Then know that I have little wealth to lose;
    A man I am cross'd with adversity;
    My riches are these poor habiliments,
    Of which if you should here disfurnish me,
    You take the sum and substance that I have.
  SECOND OUTLAW. Whither travel you?
  VALENTINE. To Verona.
  FIRST OUTLAW. Whence came you?
  VALENTINE. From Milan.
  THIRD OUTLAW. Have you long sojourn'd there?
  VALENTINE. Some sixteen months, and longer might have stay'd,
    If crooked fortune had not thwarted me.
  FIRST OUTLAW. What, were you banish'd thence?
  VALENTINE. I was.
  SECOND OUTLAW. For what offence?
  VALENTINE. For that which now torments me to rehearse:
    I kill'd a man, whose death I much repent;
    But yet I slew him manfully in fight,
    Without false vantage or base treachery.
  FIRST OUTLAW. Why, ne'er repent it, if it were done so.
    But were you banish'd for so small a fault?
  VALENTINE. I was, and held me glad of such a doom.
  SECOND OUTLAW. Have you the tongues?
  VALENTINE. My youthful travel therein made me happy,
    Or else I often had been miserable.
  THIRD OUTLAW. By the bare scalp of Robin Hood's fat friar,
    This fellow were a king for our wild faction!
  FIRST OUTLAW. We'll have him. Sirs, a word.
  SPEED. Master, be one of them; it's an honourable kind of thievery.
  VALENTINE. Peace, villain!
  SECOND OUTLAW. Tell us this: have you anything to take to?
  VALENTINE. Nothing but my fortune.
  THIRD OUTLAW. Know, then, that some of us are gentlemen,
    Such as the fury of ungovern'd youth
    Thrust from the company of awful men;
    Myself was from Verona banished
    For practising to steal away a lady,
    An heir, and near allied unto the Duke.
  SECOND OUTLAW. And I from Mantua, for a gentleman
    Who, in my mood, I stabb'd unto the heart.
  FIRST OUTLAW. And I for such-like petty crimes as these.
    But to the purpose- for we cite our faults
    That they may hold excus'd our lawless lives;
    And, partly, seeing you are beautified
    With goodly shape, and by your own report
    A linguist, and a man of such perfection
    As we do in our quality much want-
  SECOND OUTLAW. Indeed, because you are a banish'd man,
    Therefore, above the rest, we parley to you.
    Are you content to be our general-
    To make a virtue of necessity,
    And live as we do in this wilderness?
  THIRD OUTLAW. What say'st thou? Wilt thou be of our consort?
    Say 'ay' and be the captain of us all.
    We'll do thee homage, and be rul'd by thee,
    Love thee as our commander and our king.
  FIRST OUTLAW. But if thou scorn our courtesy thou diest.
  SECOND OUTLAW. Thou shalt not live to brag what we have offer'd.
  VALENTINE. I take your offer, and will live with you,
    Provided that you do no outrages
    On silly women or poor passengers.
  THIRD OUTLAW. No, we detest such vile base practices.
    Come, go with us; we'll bring thee to our crews,
    And show thee all the treasure we have got;
    Which, with ourselves, all rest at thy dispose.       Exeunt

SCENE II. Milan. Outside the DUKE'S palace, under SILVIA'S window

Enter PROTEUS

  PROTEUS. Already have I been false to Valentine,
    And now I must be as unjust to Thurio.
    Under the colour of commending him
    I have access my own love to prefer;
    But Silvia is too fair, too true, too holy,
    To be corrupted with my worthless gifts.
    When I protest true loyalty to her,
    She twits me with my falsehood to my friend;
    When to her beauty I commend my vows,
    She bids me think how I have been forsworn
    In breaking faith with Julia whom I lov'd;
    And notwithstanding all her sudden quips,
    The least whereof would quell a lover's hope,
    Yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love
    The more it grows and fawneth on her still.

                 Enter THURIO and MUSICIANS

    But here comes Thurio. Now must we to her window,
    And give some evening music to her ear.
  THURIO. How now, Sir Proteus, are you crept before us?
  PROTEUS. Ay, gentle Thurio; for you know that love
    Will creep in service where it cannot go.
  THURIO. Ay, but I hope, sir, that you love not here.
  PROTEUS. Sir, but I do; or else I would be hence.
  THURIO. Who? Silvia?
  PROTEUS. Ay, Silvia- for your sake.
  THURIO. I thank you for your own. Now, gentlemen,
    Let's tune, and to it lustily awhile.

    Enter at a distance, HOST, and JULIA in boy's clothes

  HOST. Now, my young guest, methinks you're allycholly; I pray you,
    why is it?
  JULIA. Marry, mine host, because I cannot be merry.
  HOST. Come, we'll have you merry; I'll bring you where you shall
    hear music, and see the gentleman that you ask'd for.
  JULIA. But shall I hear him speak?
  HOST. Ay, that you shall.                        [Music plays]
  JULIA. That will be music.
  HOST. Hark, hark!
  JULIA. Is he among these?
  HOST. Ay; but peace! let's hear 'em.

                   SONG
         Who is Silvia? What is she,
           That all our swains commend her?
         Holy, fair, and wise is she;
           The heaven such grace did lend her,
         That she might admired be.

         Is she kind as she is fair?
           For beauty lives with kindness.
         Love doth to her eyes repair,
           To help him of his blindness;
         And, being help'd, inhabits there.

         Then to Silvia let us sing
           That Silvia is excelling;
         She excels each mortal thing
           Upon the dull earth dwelling.
         'To her let us garlands bring.

  HOST. How now, are you sadder than you were before?
    How do you, man? The music likes you not.
  JULIA. You mistake; the musician likes me not.
  HOST. Why, my pretty youth?
  JULIA. He plays false, father.
  HOST. How, out of tune on the strings?
  JULIA. Not so; but yet so false that he grieves my very
    heart-strings.
  HOST. You have a quick ear.
  JULIA. Ay, I would I were deaf; it makes me have a slow heart.
  HOST. I perceive you delight not in music.
  JULIA. Not a whit, when it jars so.
  HOST. Hark, what fine change is in the music!
  JULIA. Ay, that change is the spite.
  HOST. You would have them always play but one thing?
  JULIA. I would always have one play but one thing.
    But, Host, doth this Sir Proteus, that we talk on,
    Often resort unto this gentlewoman?
  HOST. I tell you what Launce, his man, told me: he lov'd her out of
    all nick.
  JULIA. Where is Launce?
  HOST. Gone to seek his dog, which to-morrow, by his master's
    command, he must carry for a present to his lady.
  JULIA. Peace, stand aside; the company parts.
  PROTEUS. Sir Thurio, fear not you; I will so plead
    That you shall say my cunning drift excels.
  THURIO. Where meet we?
  PROTEUS. At Saint Gregory's well.
  THURIO. Farewell.                  Exeunt THURIO and MUSICIANS

                  Enter SILVIA above, at her window

  PROTEUS. Madam, good ev'n to your ladyship.
  SILVIA. I thank you for your music, gentlemen.
    Who is that that spake?
  PROTEUS. One, lady, if you knew his pure heart's truth,
    You would quickly learn to know him by his voice.
  SILVIA. Sir Proteus, as I take it.
  PROTEUS. Sir Proteus, gentle lady, and your servant.
  SILVIA. What's your will?
  PROTEUS. That I may compass yours.
  SILVIA. You have your wish; my will is even this,
    That presently you hie you home to bed.
    Thou subtle, perjur'd, false, disloyal man,
    Think'st thou I am so shallow, so conceitless,
    To be seduced by thy flattery
    That hast deceiv'd so many with thy vows?
    Return, return, and make thy love amends.
    For me, by this pale queen of night I swear,
    I am so far from granting thy request
    That I despise thee for thy wrongful suit,
    And by and by intend to chide myself
    Even for this time I spend in talking to thee.
  PROTEUS. I grant, sweet love, that I did love a lady;
    But she is dead.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  'Twere false, if I should speak it;
    For I am sure she is not buried.
  SILVIA. Say that she be; yet Valentine, thy friend,
    Survives, to whom, thyself art witness,
    I am betroth'd; and art thou not asham'd
    To wrong him with thy importunacy?
  PROTEUS. I likewise hear that Valentine is dead.
  SILVIA. And so suppose am I; for in his grave
    Assure thyself my love is buried.
  PROTEUS. Sweet lady, let me rake it from the earth.
  SILVIA. Go to thy lady's grave, and call hers thence;
    Or, at the least, in hers sepulchre thine.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  He heard not that.
  PROTEUS. Madam, if your heart be so obdurate,
    Vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love,
    The picture that is hanging in your chamber;
    To that I'll speak, to that I'll sigh and weep;
    For, since the substance of your perfect self
    Is else devoted, I am but a shadow;
    And to your shadow will I make true love.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  If 'twere a substance, you would, sure, deceive it
    And make it but a shadow, as I am.
  SILVIA. I am very loath to be your idol, sir;
    But since your falsehood shall become you well
    To worship shadows and adore false shapes,
    Send to me in the morning, and I'll send it;
    And so, good rest.
  PROTEUS. As wretches have o'ernight
    That wait for execution in the morn.
                                       Exeunt PROTEUS and SILVIA
  JULIA. Host, will you go?
  HOST. By my halidom, I was fast asleep.
  JULIA. Pray you, where lies Sir Proteus?
  HOST. Marry, at my house. Trust me, I think 'tis almost day.
  JULIA. Not so; but it hath been the longest night
    That e'er I watch'd, and the most heaviest.           Exeunt

SCENE III. Under SILVIA'S window

Enter EGLAMOUR

  EGLAMOUR. This is the hour that Madam Silvia
    Entreated me to call and know her mind;
    There's some great matter she'd employ me in.
    Madam, madam!

             Enter SILVIA above, at her window

  SILVIA. Who calls?
  EGLAMOUR. Your servant and your friend;
    One that attends your ladyship's command.
  SILVIA. Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good morrow!
  EGLAMOUR. As many, worthy lady, to yourself!
    According to your ladyship's impose,
    I am thus early come to know what service
    It is your pleasure to command me in.
  SILVIA. O Eglamour, thou art a gentleman-
    Think not I flatter, for I swear I do not-
    Valiant, wise, remorseful, well accomplish'd.
    Thou art not ignorant what dear good will
    I bear unto the banish'd Valentine;
    Nor how my father would enforce me marry
    Vain Thurio, whom my very soul abhors.
    Thyself hast lov'd; and I have heard thee say
    No grief did ever come so near thy heart
    As when thy lady and thy true love died,
    Upon whose grave thou vow'dst pure chastity.
    Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine,
    To Mantua, where I hear he makes abode;
    And, for the ways are dangerous to pass,
    I do desire thy worthy company,
    Upon whose faith and honour I repose.
    Urge not my father's anger, Eglamour,
    But think upon my grief, a lady's grief,
    And on the justice of my flying hence
    To keep me from a most unholy match,
    Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues.
    I do desire thee, even from a heart
    As full of sorrows as the sea of sands,
    To bear me company and go with me;
    If not, to hide what I have said to thee,
    That I may venture to depart alone.
  EGLAMOUR. Madam, I pity much your grievances;
    Which since I know they virtuously are plac'd,
    I give consent to go along with you,
    Recking as little what betideth me
    As much I wish all good befortune you.
    When will you go?
  SILVIA. This evening coming.
  EGLAMOUR. Where shall I meet you?
  SILVIA. At Friar Patrick's cell,
    Where I intend holy confession.
  EGLAMOUR. I will not fail your ladyship. Good morrow, gentle lady.
  SILVIA. Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour.                 Exeunt

SCENE IV. Under SILVIA'S Window

Enter LAUNCE with his dog

  LAUNCE. When a man's servant shall play the cur with him, look you,
  it goes hard- one that I brought up of a puppy; one that I sav'd from
  drowning, when three or four of his blind brothers and sisters went
  to it. I have taught him, even as one would say precisely 'Thus I
  would teach a dog.' I was sent to deliver him as a present to
  Mistress Silvia from my master; and I came no sooner into the
  dining-chamber, but he steps me to her trencher and steals her
  capon's leg. O, 'tis a foul thing when a cur cannot keep himself in
  all companies! I would have, as one should say, one that takes upon
  him to be a dog indeed, to be, as it were, a dog at all things. If I
  had not had more wit than he, to take a fault upon me that he did, I
  think verily he had been hang'd for't; sure as I live, he had
  suffer'd for't. You shall judge. He thrusts me himself into the
  company of three or four gentleman-like dogs under the Duke's table;
  he had not been there, bless the mark, a pissing while but all the
  chamber smelt him. 'Out with the dog' says one; 'What cur is that?'
  says another; 'Whip him out' says the third; 'Hang him up' says the
  Duke. I, having been acquainted with the smell before, knew it was
  Crab, and goes me to the fellow that whips the dogs. 'Friend,' quoth
  I 'you mean to whip the dog.' 'Ay, marry do I' quoth he. 'You do him
  the more wrong,' quoth I; "twas I did the thing you wot of.' He makes
  me no more ado, but whips me out of the chamber. How many masters
  would do this for his servant? Nay, I'll be sworn, I have sat in the
  stock for puddings he hath stol'n, otherwise he had been executed; I
  have stood on the pillory for geese he hath kill'd, otherwise he had
  suffer'd for't. Thou think'st not of this now. Nay, I remember the
  trick you serv'd me when I took my leave of Madam Silvia. Did not I
  bid thee still mark me and do as I do? When didst thou see me heave
  up my leg and make water against a gentlewoman's farthingale? Didst
  thou ever see me do such a trick?

               Enter PROTEUS, and JULIA in boy's clothes

  PROTEUS. Sebastian is thy name? I like thee well,
    And will employ thee in some service presently.
  JULIA. In what you please; I'll do what I can.
  PROTEUS. I hope thou wilt.  [To LAUNCE]  How now, you whoreson
      peasant!
    Where have you been these two days loitering?
  LAUNCE. Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Silvia the dog you bade me.
  PROTEUS. And what says she to my little jewel?
  LAUNCE. Marry, she says your dog was a cur, and tells you currish
    thanks is good enough for such a present.
  PROTEUS. But she receiv'd my dog?
  LAUNCE. No, indeed, did she not; here have I brought him back
    again.
  PROTEUS. What, didst thou offer her this from me?
  LAUNCE. Ay, sir; the other squirrel was stol'n from me by the
    hangman's boys in the market-place; and then I offer'd her mine
    own, who is a dog as big as ten of yours, and therefore the gift
    the greater.
  PROTEUS. Go, get thee hence and find my dog again,
    Or ne'er return again into my sight.
    Away, I say. Stayest thou to vex me here?        Exit LAUNCE
    A slave that still an end turns me to shame!
    Sebastian, I have entertained thee
    Partly that I have need of such a youth
    That can with some discretion do my business,
    For 'tis no trusting to yond foolish lout,
    But chiefly for thy face and thy behaviour,
    Which, if my augury deceive me not,
    Witness good bringing up, fortune, and truth;
    Therefore, know thou, for this I entertain thee.
    Go presently, and take this ring with thee,
    Deliver it to Madam Silvia-
    She lov'd me well deliver'd it to me.
  JULIA. It seems you lov'd not her, to leave her token.
    She is dead, belike?
  PROTEUS. Not so; I think she lives.
  JULIA. Alas!
  PROTEUS. Why dost thou cry 'Alas'?
  JULIA. I cannot choose
    But pity her.
  PROTEUS. Wherefore shouldst thou pity her?
  JULIA. Because methinks that she lov'd you as well
    As you do love your lady Silvia.
    She dreams on him that has forgot her love:
    You dote on her that cares not for your love.
    'Tis pity love should be so contrary;
    And thinking on it makes me cry 'Alas!'
  PROTEUS. Well, give her that ring, and therewithal
    This letter. That's her chamber. Tell my lady
    I claim the promise for her heavenly picture.
    Your message done, hie home unto my chamber,
    Where thou shalt find me sad and solitary.      Exit PROTEUS
  JULIA. How many women would do such a message?
    Alas, poor Proteus, thou hast entertain'd
    A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs.
    Alas, poor fool, why do I pity him
    That with his very heart despiseth me?
    Because he loves her, he despiseth me;
    Because I love him, I must pity him.
    This ring I gave him, when he parted from me,
    To bind him to remember my good will;
    And now am I, unhappy messenger,
    To plead for that which I would not obtain,
    To carry that which I would have refus'd,
    To praise his faith, which I would have disprais'd.
    I am my master's true confirmed love,
    But cannot be true servant to my master
    Unless I prove false traitor to myself.
    Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly
    As, heaven it knows, I would not have him speed.

                     Enter SILVIA, attended

    Gentlewoman, good day! I pray you be my mean
    To bring me where to speak with Madam Silvia.
  SILVIA. What would you with her, if that I be she?
  JULIA. If you be she, I do entreat your patience
    To hear me speak the message I am sent on.
  SILVIA. From whom?
  JULIA. From my master, Sir Proteus, madam.
  SILVIA. O, he sends you for a picture?
  JULIA. Ay, madam.
  SILVIA. Ursula, bring my picture there.
    Go, give your master this. Tell him from me,
    One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget,
    Would better fit his chamber than this shadow.
  JULIA. Madam, please you peruse this letter.
    Pardon me, madam; I have unadvis'd
    Deliver'd you a paper that I should not.
    This is the letter to your ladyship.
  SILVIA. I pray thee let me look on that again.
  JULIA. It may not be; good madam, pardon me.
  SILVIA. There, hold!
    I will not look upon your master's lines.
    I know they are stuff'd with protestations,
    And full of new-found oaths, which he wul break
    As easily as I do tear his paper.
  JULIA. Madam, he sends your ladyship this ring.
  SILVIA. The more shame for him that he sends it me;
    For I have heard him say a thousand times
    His Julia gave it him at his departure.
    Though his false finger have profan'd the ring,
    Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong.
  JULIA. She thanks you.
  SILVIA. What say'st thou?
  JULIA. I thank you, madam, that you tender her.
    Poor gentlewoman, my master wrongs her much.
  SILVIA. Dost thou know her?
  JULIA. Almost as well as I do know myself.
    To think upon her woes, I do protest
    That I have wept a hundred several times.
  SILVIA. Belike she thinks that Proteus hath forsook her.
  JULIA. I think she doth, and that's her cause of sorrow.
  SILVIA. Is she not passing fair?
  JULIA. She hath been fairer, madam, than she is.
    When she did think my master lov'd her well,
    She, in my judgment, was as fair as you;
    But since she did neglect her looking-glass
    And threw her sun-expelling mask away,
    The air hath starv'd the roses in her cheeks
    And pinch'd the lily-tincture of her face,
    That now she is become as black as I.
  SILVIA. How tall was she?
  JULIA. About my stature; for at Pentecost,
    When all our pageants of delight were play'd,
    Our youth got me to play the woman's part,
    And I was trimm'd in Madam Julia's gown;
    Which served me as fit, by all men's judgments,
    As if the garment had been made for me;
    Therefore I know she is about my height.
    And at that time I made her weep a good,
    For I did play a lamentable part.
    Madam, 'twas Ariadne passioning
    For Theseus' perjury and unjust flight;
    Which I so lively acted with my tears
    That my poor mistress, moved therewithal,
    Wept bitterly; and would I might be dead
    If I in thought felt not her very sorrow.
  SILVIA. She is beholding to thee, gentle youth.
    Alas, poor lady, desolate and left!
    I weep myself, to think upon thy words.
    Here, youth, there is my purse; I give thee this
    For thy sweet mistress' sake, because thou lov'st her.
    Farewell.                        Exit SILVIA with ATTENDANTS
  JULIA. And she shall thank you for't, if e'er you know her.
    A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful!
    I hope my master's suit will be but cold,
    Since she respects my mistress' love so much.
    Alas, how love can trifle with itself!
    Here is her picture; let me see. I think,
    If I had such a tire, this face of mine
    Were full as lovely as is this of hers;
    And yet the painter flatter'd her a little,
    Unless I flatter with myself too much.
    Her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow;
    If that be all the difference in his love,
    I'll get me such a colour'd periwig.
    Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine;
    Ay, but her forehead's low, and mine's as high.
    What should it be that he respects in her
    But I can make respective in myself,
    If this fond Love were not a blinded god?
    Come, shadow, come, and take this shadow up,
    For 'tis thy rival. O thou senseless form,
    Thou shalt be worshipp'd, kiss'd, lov'd, and ador'd!
    And were there sense in his idolatry
    My substance should be statue in thy stead.
    I'll use thee kindly for thy mistress' sake,
    That us'd me so; or else, by Jove I vow,
    I should have scratch'd out your unseeing eyes,
    To make my master out of love with thee.                Exit

ACT V. SCENE I. Milan. An abbey

Enter EGLAMOUR

  EGLAMOUR. The sun begins to gild the western sky,
    And now it is about the very hour
    That Silvia at Friar Patrick's cell should meet me.
    She will not fail, for lovers break not hours
    Unless it be to come before their time,
    So much they spur their expedition.

                         Enter SILVIA

    See where she comes. Lady, a happy evening!
  SILVIA. Amen, amen! Go on, good Eglamour,
    Out at the postern by the abbey wall;
    I fear I am attended by some spies.
  EGLAMOUR. Fear not. The forest is not three leagues off;
    If we recover that, we are sure enough.               Exeunt

SCENE II. Milan. The DUKE'S palace

Enter THURIO, PROTEUS, and JULIA as SEBASTIAN

  THURIO. Sir Proteus, what says Silvia to my suit?
  PROTEUS. O, sir, I find her milder than she was;
    And yet she takes exceptions at your person.
  THURIO. What, that my leg is too long?
  PROTEUS. No; that it is too little.
  THURIO. I'll wear a boot to make it somewhat rounder.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  But love will not be spurr'd to what it loathes.
  THURIO. What says she to my face?
  PROTEUS. She says it is a fair one.
  THURIO. Nay, then, the wanton lies; my face is black.
  PROTEUS. But pearls are fair; and the old saying is:
    Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  'Tis true, such pearls as put out ladies' eyes;
    For I had rather wink than look on them.
  THURIO. How likes she my discourse?
  PROTEUS. Ill, when you talk of war.
  THURIO. But well when I discourse of love and peace?
  JULIA.  [Aside]  But better, indeed, when you hold your peace.
  THURIO. What says she to my valour?
  PROTEUS. O, sir, she makes no doubt of that.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  She needs not, when she knows it cowardice.
  THURIO. What says she to my birth?
  PROTEUS. That you are well deriv'd.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  True; from a gentleman to a fool.
  THURIO. Considers she my possessions?
  PROTEUS. O, ay; and pities them.
  THURIO. Wherefore?
  JULIA.  [Aside]  That such an ass should owe them.
  PROTEUS. That they are out by lease.
  JULIA. Here comes the Duke.

                          Enter DUKE

  DUKE. How now, Sir Proteus! how now, Thurio!
    Which of you saw Sir Eglamour of late?
  THURIO. Not I.
  PROTEUS. Nor I.
  DUKE. Saw you my daughter?
  PROTEUS. Neither.
  DUKE. Why then,
    She's fled unto that peasant Valentine;
    And Eglamour is in her company.
    'Tis true; for Friar Lawrence met them both
    As he in penance wander'd through the forest;
    Him he knew well, and guess'd that it was she,
    But, being mask'd, he was not sure of it;
    Besides, she did intend confession
    At Patrick's cell this even; and there she was not.
    These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence;
    Therefore, I pray you, stand not to discourse,
    But mount you presently, and meet with me
    Upon the rising of the mountain foot
    That leads toward Mantua, whither they are fled.
    Dispatch, sweet gentlemen, and follow me.               Exit
  THURIO. Why, this it is to be a peevish girl
    That flies her fortune when it follows her.
    I'll after, more to be reveng'd on Eglamour
    Than for the love of reckless Silvia.                   Exit
  PROTEUS. And I will follow, more for Silvia's love
    Than hate of Eglamour, that goes with her.              Exit
  JULIA. And I will follow, more to cross that love
    Than hate for Silvia, that is gone for love.            Exit

SCENE III. The frontiers of Mantua. The forest

Enter OUTLAWS with SILVA

  FIRST OUTLAW. Come, come.
    Be patient; we must bring you to our captain.
  SILVIA. A thousand more mischances than this one
    Have learn'd me how to brook this patiently.
  SECOND OUTLAW. Come, bring her away.
  FIRST OUTLAW. Where is the gentleman that was with her?
  SECOND OUTLAW. Being nimble-footed, he hath outrun us,
    But Moyses and Valerius follow him.
    Go thou with her to the west end of the wood;
    There is our captain; we'll follow him that's fled.
    The thicket is beset; he cannot 'scape.
  FIRST OUTLAW. Come, I must bring you to our captain's cave;
    Fear not; he bears an honourable mind,
    And will not use a woman lawlessly.
  SILVIA. O Valentine, this I endure for thee!            Exeunt

SCENE IV. Another part of the forest

Enter VALENTINE

  VALENTINE. How use doth breed a habit in a man!
    This shadowy desert, unfrequented woods,
    I better brook than flourishing peopled towns.
    Here can I sit alone, unseen of any,
    And to the nightingale's complaining notes
    Tune my distresses and record my woes.
    O thou that dost inhabit in my breast,
    Leave not the mansion so long tenantless,
    Lest, growing ruinous, the building fall
    And leave no memory of what it was!
    Repair me with thy presence, Silvia:
    Thou gentle nymph, cherish thy forlorn swain.
    What halloing and what stir is this to-day?
    These are my mates, that make their wills their law,
    Have some unhappy passenger in chase.
    They love me well; yet I have much to do
    To keep them from uncivil outrages.
    Withdraw thee, Valentine. Who's this comes here?
                                                   [Steps aside]

          Enter PROTEUS, SILVIA, and JULIA as Sebastian

  PROTEUS. Madam, this service I have done for you,
    Though you respect not aught your servant doth,
    To hazard life, and rescue you from him
    That would have forc'd your honour and your love.
    Vouchsafe me, for my meed, but one fair look;
    A smaller boon than this I cannot beg,
    And less than this, I am sure, you cannot give.
  VALENTINE.  [Aside]  How like a dream is this I see and hear!
    Love, lend me patience to forbear awhile.
  SILVIA. O miserable, unhappy that I am!
  PROTEUS. Unhappy were you, madam, ere I came;
    But by my coming I have made you happy.
  SILVIA. By thy approach thou mak'st me most unhappy.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  And me, when he approacheth to your presence.
  SILVIA. Had I been seized by a hungry lion,
    I would have been a breakfast to the beast
    Rather than have false Proteus rescue me.
    O, heaven be judge how I love Valentine,
    Whose life's as tender to me as my soul!
    And full as much, for more there cannot be,
    I do detest false, perjur'd Proteus.
    Therefore be gone; solicit me no more.
  PROTEUS. What dangerous action, stood it next to death,
    Would I not undergo for one calm look?
    O, 'tis the curse in love, and still approv'd,
    When women cannot love where they're belov'd!
  SILVIA. When Proteus cannot love where he's belov'd!
    Read over Julia's heart, thy first best love,
    For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith
    Into a thousand oaths; and all those oaths
    Descended into perjury, to love me.
    Thou hast no faith left now, unless thou'dst two,
    And that's far worse than none; better have none
    Than plural faith, which is too much by one.
    Thou counterfeit to thy true friend!
  PROTEUS. In love,
    Who respects friend?
  SILVIA. All men but Proteus.
  PROTEUS. Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words
    Can no way change you to a milder form,
    I'll woo you like a soldier, at arms' end,
    And love you 'gainst the nature of love- force ye.
  SILVIA. O heaven!
  PROTEUS. I'll force thee yield to my desire.
  VALENTINE. Ruffian! let go that rude uncivil touch;
    Thou friend of an ill fashion!
  PROTEUS. Valentine!
  VALENTINE. Thou common friend, that's without faith or love-
    For such is a friend now; treacherous man,
    Thou hast beguil'd my hopes; nought but mine eye
    Could have persuaded me. Now I dare not say
    I have one friend alive: thou wouldst disprove me.
    Who should be trusted, when one's own right hand
    Is perjured to the bosom? Proteus,
    I am sorry I must never trust thee more,
    But count the world a stranger for thy sake.
    The private wound is deepest. O time most accurst!
    'Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst!
  PROTEUS. My shame and guilt confounds me.
    Forgive me, Valentine; if hearty sorrow
    Be a sufficient ransom for offence,
    I tender 't here; I do as truly suffer
    As e'er I did commit.
  VALENTINE. Then I am paid;
    And once again I do receive thee honest.
    Who by repentance is not satisfied
    Is nor of heaven nor earth, for these are pleas'd;
    By penitence th' Eternal's wrath's appeas'd.
    And, that my love may appear plain and free,
    All that was mine in Silvia I give thee.
  JULIA. O me unhappy!                                  [Swoons]
  PROTEUS. Look to the boy.
  VALENTINE. Why, boy! why, wag! how now!
    What's the matter? Look up; speak.
  JULIA. O good sir, my master charg'd me to deliver a ring to Madam
    Silvia, which, out of my neglect, was never done.
  PROTEUS. Where is that ring, boy?
  JULIA. Here 'tis; this is it.
  PROTEUS. How! let me see. Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.
  JULIA. O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook;
    This is the ring you sent to Silvia.
  PROTEUS. But how cam'st thou by this ring?
    At my depart I gave this unto Julia.
  JULIA. And Julia herself did give it me;
    And Julia herself have brought it hither.
  PROTEUS. How! Julia!
  JULIA. Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths,
    And entertain'd 'em deeply in her heart.
    How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root!
    O Proteus, let this habit make thee blush!
    Be thou asham'd that I have took upon me
    Such an immodest raiment- if shame live
    In a disguise of love.
    It is the lesser blot, modesty finds,
    Women to change their shapes than men their minds.
  PROTEUS. Than men their minds! 'tis true. O heaven, were man
    But constant, he were perfect! That one error
    Fills him with faults; makes him run through all th' sins:
    Inconstancy falls off ere it begins.
    What is in Silvia's face but I may spy
    More fresh in Julia's with a constant eye?
  VALENTINE. Come, come, a hand from either.
    Let me be blest to make this happy close;
    'Twere pity two such friends should be long foes.
  PROTEUS. Bear witness, heaven, I have my wish for ever.
  JULIA. And I mine.

                Enter OUTLAWS, with DUKE and THURIO

  OUTLAW. A prize, a prize, a prize!
  VALENTINE. Forbear, forbear, I say; it is my lord the Duke.
    Your Grace is welcome to a man disgrac'd,
    Banished Valentine.
  DUKE. Sir Valentine!
  THURIO. Yonder is Silvia; and Silvia's mine.
  VALENTINE. Thurio, give back, or else embrace thy death;
    Come not within the measure of my wrath;
    Do not name Silvia thine; if once again,
    Verona shall not hold thee. Here she stands
    Take but possession of her with a touch-
    I dare thee but to breathe upon my love.
  THURIO. Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I;
    I hold him but a fool that will endanger
    His body for a girl that loves him not.
    I claim her not, and therefore she is thine.
  DUKE. The more degenerate and base art thou
    To make such means for her as thou hast done
    And leave her on such slight conditions.
    Now, by the honour of my ancestry,
    I do applaud thy spirit, Valentine,
    And think thee worthy of an empress' love.
    Know then, I here forget all former griefs,
    Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again,
    Plead a new state in thy unrivall'd merit,
    To which I thus subscribe: Sir Valentine,
    Thou art a gentleman, and well deriv'd;
    Take thou thy Silvia, for thou hast deserv'd her.
  VALENTINE. I thank your Grace; the gift hath made me happy.
    I now beseech you, for your daughter's sake,
    To grant one boon that I shall ask of you.
  DUKE. I grant it for thine own, whate'er it be.
  VALENTINE. These banish'd men, that I have kept withal,
    Are men endu'd with worthy qualities;
    Forgive them what they have committed here,
    And let them be recall'd from their exile:
    They are reformed, civil, full of good,
    And fit for great employment, worthy lord.
  DUKE. Thou hast prevail'd; I pardon them, and thee;
    Dispose of them as thou know'st their deserts.
    Come, let us go; we will include all jars
    With triumphs, mirth, and rare solemnity.
  VALENTINE. And, as we walk along, I dare be bold
    With our discourse to make your Grace to smile.
    What think you of this page, my lord?
  DUKE. I think the boy hath grace in him; he blushes.
  VALENTINE. I warrant you, my lord- more grace than boy.
  DUKE. What mean you by that saying?
  VALENTINE. Please you, I'll tell you as we pass along,
    That you will wonder what hath fortuned.
    Come, Proteus, 'tis your penance but to hear
    The story of your loves discovered.
    That done, our day of marriage shall be yours;
    One feast, one house, one mutual happiness!     Exeunt




THE TWO NOBLE KINSMEN




Contents

 ACT I
 PROLOGUE
 Scene I. Athens. Before a temple
 Scene II. Thebes. The Court of the Palace
 Scene III. Before the gates of Athens
 Scene IV. A field before Thebes.
 Scene V. Another part of the same, more remote from Thebes

 ACT II
 Scene I. Athens. A garden, with a castle in the background
 Scene II. The prison
 Scene III. The country near Athens
 Scene IV. Athens. A room in the prison
 Scene V. An open place in Athens
 Scene VI. Athens. Before the prison

 ACT III
 Scene I. A forest near Athens
 Scene II. Another part of the forest
 Scene III. The same part of the forest as in scene I.
 Scene IV. Another part of the forest
 Scene V. Another part of the forest
 Scene VI. The same part of the forest as in scene III.

 ACT IV
 Scene I. Athens. A room in the prison
 Scene II. A Room in the Palace
 Scene III. A room in the prison

 ACT V
 Scene I. Athens. Before the Temples of Mars, Venus, and Diana
 Scene II. Athens. A Room in the Prison
 Scene III. A part of the Forest near Athens, and near the Place appointed for the Combat
 Scene IV. The same; a Block prepared
 EPILOGUE




Dramatis Person

PROLOGUE

ARCITE, the two noble kinsmen, cousins,
PALAMON, nephews of Creon, King of Thebes

THESEUS, Duke of Athens
HIPPOLYTA, Queen of the Amazons, later Duchess of Athens
EMILIA, Sister of Hippolyta
PIRITHOUS, friend to Theseus

Three QUEENS, widows of the kings killed in laying siege to Thebes

The JAILER of Theseuss prison
His DAUGHTER, in love with Palamon
His BROTHER,
The WOOER of the Jailers daughter
Two FRIENDS of the Jailer,
A DOCTOR

ARTESIUS, an Athenian soldier
VALERIUS, a Theban
WOMAN, attending on Emilia
An Athenian GENTLEMAN
Six KNIGHTS, three accompanying Arcite, three Palamon

Six COUNTRYMEN, one dressed as a Bavian or baboon
Gerald, a SCHOOLMASTER
NEL, a countrywoman
A TABORER

A singing BOY
A HERALD
A MESSENGER
A SERVANT

EPILOGUE

Hymen (god of weddings), lords, soldiers, four countrywomen (Fritz,
Maudlin, Luce, and Barbary), nymphs, attendants, maids, executioner,
guard

SCENE: Athens and the Neighbourhood, except in part of the first Act,
where it is Thebes and the Neighbourhood




PROLOGUE


Flourish. Enter Prologue.

PROLOGUE.
New plays and maidenheads are near akin:
Much followed both, for both much money gien,
If they stand sound and well. And a good play,
Whose modest scenes blush on his marriage day
And shake to lose his honour, is like her
That after holy tie and first nights stir
Yet still is Modesty, and still retains
More of the maid, to sight, than husbands pains.
We pray our play may be so, for I am sure
It has a noble breeder and a pure,
A learned, and a poet never went
More famous yet twixt Po and silver Trent.
Chaucer, of all admired, the story gives;
There, constant to eternity, it lives.
If we let fall the nobleness of this,
And the first sound this child hear be a hiss,
How will it shake the bones of that good man
And make him cry from underground, O, fan
From me the witless chaff of such a writer
That blasts my bays and my famed works makes lighter
Than Robin Hood! This is the fear we bring;
For, to say truth, it were an endless thing
And too ambitious, to aspire to him,
Weak as we are, and, almost breathless, swim
In this deep water. Do but you hold out
Your helping hands, and we shall tack about
And something do to save us. You shall hear
Scenes, though below his art, may yet appear
Worth two hours travel. To his bones sweet sleep;
Content to you. If this play do not keep
A little dull time from us, we perceive
Our losses fall so thick, we must needs leave.

[_Flourish. Exit._]




ACT I

SCENE I. Athens. Before a temple


Enter Hymen with a torch burning; a Boy, in a white robe before
singing, and strewing flowers. After Hymen, a Nymph encompassed in her
tresses, bearing a wheaten garland; then Theseus between two other
Nymphs with wheaten chaplets on their heads. Then Hippolyta, the bride,
led by Pirithous, and another holding a garland over her head, her
tresses likewise hanging. After her, Emilia, holding up her train. Then
Artesius and Attendants.

[_Music._]

The Song

_Roses, their sharp spines being gone,
Not royal in their smells alone,
    But in their hue;
Maiden pinks of odour faint,
Daisies smell-less, yet most quaint,
    And sweet thyme true;_

_Primrose, first-born child of Ver,
Merry springtimes harbinger,
    With harebells dim,
Oxlips in their cradles growing,
Marigolds on deathbeds blowing,
    Larks-heels trim;_

[_Strews flowers._]

_All dear Natures children sweet
Lie fore bride and bridegrooms feet,
    Blessing their sense.
Not an angel of the air,
Bird melodious or bird fair,
    Is absent hence._

_The crow, the slandrous cuckoo, nor
The boding raven, nor chough hoar,
    Nor chattring pie,
May on our bride-house perch or sing,
Or with them any discord bring,
    But from it fly._

Enter three Queens in black, with veils stained, with imperial crowns.
The first Queen falls down at the foot of Theseus; the second falls
down at the foot of Hippolyta; the third before Emilia.

FIRST QUEEN.
For pitys sake and true gentilitys,
Hear and respect me.

SECOND QUEEN.
For your mothers sake,
And as you wish your womb may thrive with fair ones,
Hear and respect me.

THIRD QUEEN.
Now, for the love of him whom Jove hath marked
The honour of your bed, and for the sake
Of clear virginity, be advocate
For us and our distresses. This good deed
Shall raze you out o th book of trespasses
All you are set down there.

THESEUS.
Sad lady, rise.

HIPPOLYTA.
Stand up.

EMILIA.
No knees to me.
What woman I may stead that is distressed,
Does bind me to her.

THESEUS.
Whats your request? Deliver you for all.

FIRST QUEEN.
We are three queens whose sovereigns fell before
The wrath of cruel Creon, who endure
The beaks of ravens, talons of the kites,
And pecks of crows, in the foul fields of Thebes.
He will not suffer us to burn their bones,
To urn their ashes, nor to take th offence
Of mortal loathsomeness from the blest eye
Of holy Phbus, but infects the winds
With stench of our slain lords. O, pity, Duke!
Thou purger of the earth, draw thy feared sword
That does good turns to th world; give us the bones
Of our dead kings, that we may chapel them;
And of thy boundless goodness take some note
That for our crowned heads we have no roof
Save this, which is the lions and the bears,
And vault to everything.

THESEUS.
Pray you, kneel not.
I was transported with your speech and suffered
Your knees to wrong themselves. I have heard the fortunes
Of your dead lords, which gives me such lamenting
As wakes my vengeance and revenge for em.
King Capaneus was your lord. The day
That he should marry you, at such a season
As now it is with me, I met your groom
By Marss altar. You were that time fair!
Not Junos mantle fairer than your tresses,
Nor in more bounty spread her. Your wheaten wreath
Was then nor threshed nor blasted. Fortune at you
Dimpled her cheek with smiles. Hercules, our kinsman,
Then weaker than your eyes, laid by his club;
He tumbled down upon his Nemean hide
And swore his sinews thawed. O grief and time,
Fearful consumers, you will all devour!

FIRST QUEEN.
O, I hope some god,
Some god hath put his mercy in your manhood,
Whereto hell infuse power, and press you forth
Our undertaker.

THESEUS.
O, no knees, none, widow!
Unto the helmeted Bellona use them,
And pray for me, your soldier.
Troubled I am.

[_Turns away._]

SECOND QUEEN.
Honoured Hippolyta,
Most dreaded Amazonian, that hast slain
The scythe-tusked boar; that with thy arm, as strong
As it is white, wast near to make the male
To thy sex captive, but that this thy lord,
Born to uphold creation in that honour
First nature styled it in, shrunk thee into
The bound thou wast oerflowing, at once subduing
Thy force and thy affection; soldieress
That equally canst poise sternness with pity,
Whom now I know hast much more power on him
Than ever he had on thee, who owst his strength
And his love too, who is a servant for
The tenor of thy speech, dear glass of ladies,
Bid him that we, whom flaming war doth scorch,
Under the shadow of his sword may cool us;
Require him he advance it oer our heads;
Speak t in a womans key, like such a woman
As any of us three; weep ere you fail.
Lend us a knee;
But touch the ground for us no longer time
Than a doves motion when the heads plucked off.
Tell him if he i th blood-sized field lay swollen,
Showing the sun his teeth, grinning at the moon,
What you would do.

HIPPOLYTA.
Poor lady, say no more.
I had as lief trace this good action with you
As that whereto I am going, and never yet
Went I so willing way. My lord is taken
Heart-deep with your distress. Let him consider;
Ill speak anon.

THIRD QUEEN.
O, my petition was
Set down in ice, which by hot grief uncandied
Melts into drops; so sorrow, wanting form,
Is pressed with deeper matter.

EMILIA.
Pray, stand up;
Your grief is written in your cheek.

THIRD QUEEN.
O, woe!
You cannot read it there. There through my tears,
Like wrinkled pebbles in a glassy stream,
You may behold em. Lady, lady, alack!
He that will all the treasure know o th earth
Must know the center too; he that will fish
For my least minnow, let him lead his line
To catch one at my heart. O, pardon me!
Extremity, that sharpens sundry wits,
Makes me a fool.

EMILIA.
Pray you say nothing, pray you.
Who cannot feel nor see the rain, being in t,
Knows neither wet nor dry. If that you were
The ground-piece of some painter, I would buy you
T instruct me gainst a capital grief, indeed
Such heart-pierced demonstration. But, alas,
Being a natural sister of our sex,
Your sorrow beats so ardently upon me
That it shall make a counter-reflect gainst
My brothers heart and warm it to some pity,
Though it were made of stone. Pray have good comfort.

THESEUS.
Forward to th temple! Leave not out a jot
O th sacred ceremony.

FIRST QUEEN.
O, this celebration
Will longer last and be more costly than
Your suppliants war! Remember that your fame
Knolls in the ear o th world; what you do quickly
Is not done rashly; your first thought is more
Than others laboured meditance, your premeditating
More than their actions. But, O Jove, your actions,
Soon as they move, as ospreys do the fish,
Subdue before they touch. Think, dear Duke, think
What beds our slain kings have!

SECOND QUEEN.
What griefs our beds,
That our dear lords have none!

THIRD QUEEN.
None fit for th dead.
Those that with cords, knives, drams, precipitance,
Weary of this worlds light, have to themselves
Been deaths most horrid agents, human grace
Affords them dust and shadow.

FIRST QUEEN.
But our lords
Lie blistring fore the visitating sun,
And were good kings when living.

THESEUS.
It is true, and I will give you comfort
To give your dead lords graves;
The which to do must make some work with Creon.

FIRST QUEEN.
And that work presents itself to th doing.
Now twill take form; the heats are gone tomorrow.
Then, bootless toil must recompense itself
With its own sweat. Now hes secure,
Not dreams we stand before your puissance,
Rinsing our holy begging in our eyes
To make petition clear.

SECOND QUEEN.
Now you may take him, drunk with his victory.

THIRD QUEEN.
And his army full of bread and sloth.

THESEUS.
Artesius, that best knowest
How to draw out fit to this enterprise
The primst for this proceeding, and the number
To carry such a business: forth and levy
Our worthiest instruments, whilst we dispatch
This grand act of our life, this daring deed
Of fate in wedlock.

FIRST QUEEN.
Dowagers, take hands.
Let us be widows to our woes; delay
Commends us to a famishing hope.

ALL THE QUEENS.
Farewell!

SECOND QUEEN.
We come unseasonably; but when could grief
Cull forth, as unpanged judgement can, fittst time
For best solicitation?

THESEUS.
Why, good ladies,
This is a service, whereto I am going,
Greater than any war; it more imports me
Than all the actions that I have foregone,
Or futurely can cope.

FIRST QUEEN.
The more proclaiming
Our suit shall be neglected when her arms,
Able to lock Jove from a synod, shall
By warranting moonlight corselet thee. O, when
Her twinning cherries shall their sweetness fall
Upon thy tasteful lips, what wilt thou think
Of rotten kings or blubbered queens? What care
For what thou feelst not, what thou feelst being able
To make Mars spurn his drum? O, if thou couch
But one night with her, every hour in t will
Take hostage of thee for a hundred, and
Thou shalt remember nothing more than what
That banquet bids thee to.

HIPPOLYTA.
Though much unlike
You should be so transported, as much sorry
I should be such a suitor, yet I think,
Did I not, by th abstaining of my joy,
Which breeds a deeper longing, cure their surfeit
That craves a present medcine, I should pluck
All ladies scandal on me. Therefore, sir,

[_She kneels._]

As I shall here make trial of my prayers,
Either presuming them to have some force,
Or sentencing for aye their vigor dumb,
Prorogue this business we are going about, and hang
Your shield afore your heart, about that neck
Which is my fee, and which I freely lend
To do these poor queens service.

ALL QUEENS.
[_To Emilia_.] O, help now!
Our cause cries for your knee.

EMILIA.
[_To Theseus, kneeling_.] If you grant not
My sister her petition in that force,
With that celerity and nature, which
She makes it in, from henceforth Ill not dare
To ask you anything, nor be so hardy
Ever to take a husband.

THESEUS.
Pray stand up.
I am entreating of myself to do

[_They rise._]

That which you kneel to have me.Pirithous,
Lead on the bride; get you and pray the gods
For success and return; omit not anything
In the pretended celebration.Queens,
Follow your soldier. [_To Artesius._] As before, hence you,
And at the banks of Aulis meet us with
The forces you can raise, where we shall find
The moiety of a number for a business
More bigger looked.

[_Exit Artesius._]

[_To Hippolyta._] Since that our theme is haste,
I stamp this kiss upon thy currant lip;
Sweet, keep it as my token. Set you forward,
For I will see you gone.

[_The wedding procession moves towards the temple._]

Farewell, my beauteous sister.Pirithous,
Keep the feast full; bate not an hour on t.

PIRITHOUS.
Sir,
Ill follow you at heels. The feasts solemnity
Shall want till your return.

THESEUS.
Cousin, I charge you,
Budge not from Athens. We shall be returning
Ere you can end this feast, of which I pray you
Make no abatement. Once more, farewell all.

[_Exeunt all but Theseus and the Queens._]

FIRST QUEEN.
Thus dost thou still make good the tongue o th world.

SECOND QUEEN.
And earnst a deity equal with Mars.

THIRD QUEEN.
If not above him, for
Thou, being but mortal, makst affections bend
To godlike honours; they themselves, some say,
Groan under such a mastry.

THESEUS.
As we are men,
Thus should we do; being sensually subdued,
We lose our human title. Good cheer, ladies.
Now turn we towards your comforts.

[_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Thebes. The Court of the Palace

Enter Palamon and Arcite.

ARCITE.
Dear Palamon, dearer in love than blood
And our prime cousin, yet unhardened in
The crimes of nature, let us leave the city
Thebes, and the temptings in t, before we further
Sully our gloss of youth
And here to keep in abstinence we shame
As in incontinence; for not to swim
I th aid o th current, were almost to sink,
At least to frustrate striving; and to follow
The common stream, twould bring us to an eddy
Where we should turn or drown; if labour through,
Our gain but life and weakness.

PALAMON.
Your advice
Is cried up with example. What strange ruins,
Since first we went to school, may we perceive
Walking in Thebes! Scars and bare weeds
The gain o th martialist, who did propound
To his bold ends honour and golden ingots,
Which, though he won, he had not, and now flirted
By peace for whom he fought! Who then shall offer
To Marss so-scorned altar? I do bleed
When such I meet, and wish great Juno would
Resume her ancient fit of jealousy
To get the soldier work, that peace might purge
For her repletion, and retain anew
Her charitable heart, now hard and harsher
Than strife or war could be.

ARCITE.
Are you not out?
Meet you no ruin but the soldier in
The cranks and turns of Thebes? You did begin
As if you met decays of many kinds.
Perceive you none that do arouse your pity
But th unconsidered soldier?

PALAMON.
Yes, I pity
Decays whereer I find them, but such most
That, sweating in an honourable toil,
Are paid with ice to cool em.

ARCITE.
Tis not this
I did begin to speak of. This is virtue
Of no respect in Thebes. I spake of Thebes,
How dangerous, if we will keep our honours,
It is for our residing, where every evil
Hath a good colour; where every seeming goods
A certain evil; where not to be een jump
As they are here were to be strangers, and,
Such things to be, mere monsters.

PALAMON.
Tis in our power
Unless we fear that apes can tutor sto
Be masters of our manners. What need I
Affect anothers gait, which is not catching
Where there is faith? Or to be fond upon
Anothers way of speech, when by mine own
I may be reasonably conceived, saved too,
Speaking it truly? Why am I bound
By any generous bond to follow him
Follows his tailor, haply so long until
The followed make pursuit? Or let me know
Why mine own barber is unblessed, with him
My poor chin too, for tis not scissored just
To such a favourites glass? What canon is there
That does command my rapier from my hip
To dangle t in my hand, or to go tiptoe
Before the street be foul? Either I am
The fore-horse in the team, or I am none
That draw i th sequent trace. These poor slight sores
Need not a plantain; that which rips my bosom
Almost to th hearts

ARCITE.
Our uncle Creon.

PALAMON.
He.
A most unbounded tyrant, whose successes
Makes heaven unfeared and villainy assured
Beyond its power theres nothing; almost puts
Faith in a fever, and deifies alone
Voluble chance; who only attributes
The faculties of other instruments
To his own nerves and act; commands men service,
And what they win in t, boot and glory; one
That fears not to do harm; good, dares not. Let
The blood of mine thats sib to him be sucked
From me with leeches; let them break and fall
Off me with that corruption.

ARCITE.
Clear-spirited cousin,
Lets leave his court, that we may nothing share
Of his loud infamy; for our milk
Will relish of the pasture, and we must
Be vile or disobedient; not his kinsmen
In blood unless in quality.

PALAMON.
Nothing truer.
I think the echoes of his shames have deafed
The ears of heavenly justice. Widows cries
Descend again into their throats and have not
Due audience of the gods.

Enter Valerius.

Valerius!

VALERIUS.
The King calls for you; yet be leaden-footed
Till his great rage be off him. Phbus, when
He broke his whipstock and exclaimed against
The horses of the sun, but whispered to
The loudness of his fury.

PALAMON.
Small winds shake him.
But whats the matter?

VALERIUS.
Theseus, who where he threats appalls, hath sent
Deadly defiance to him and pronounces
Ruin to Thebes, who is at hand to seal
The promise of his wrath.

ARCITE.
Let him approach.
But that we fear the gods in him, he brings not
A jot of terror to us. Yet what man
Thirds his own worththe case is each of ours
When that his actions dregged with mind assured
Tis bad he goes about?

PALAMON.
Leave that unreasoned.
Our services stand now for Thebes, not Creon.
Yet to be neutral to him were dishonour,
Rebellious to oppose; therefore we must
With him stand to the mercy of our fate,
Who hath bounded our last minute.

ARCITE.
So we must.
[_To Valerius._] Is t said this wars afoot? Or, it shall be,
On fail of some condition?

VALERIUS.
Tis in motion;
The intelligence of state came in the instant
With the defier.

PALAMON.
Lets to the King; who, were he
A quarter carrier of that honour which
His enemy come in, the blood we venture
Should be as for our health, which were not spent,
Rather laid out for purchase. But alas,
Our hands advanced before our hearts, what will
The fall o th stroke do damage?

ARCITE.
Let th event,
That never-erring arbitrator, tell us
When we know all ourselves; and let us follow
The becking of our chance.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Before the gates of Athens

Enter Pirithous, Hippolyta and Emilia.

PIRITHOUS.
No further.

HIPPOLYTA.
Sir, farewell. Repeat my wishes
To our great lord, of whose success I dare not
Make any timorous question; yet I wish him
Excess and overflow of power, an t might be,
To dure ill-dealing fortune. Speed to him!
Store never hurts good governors.

PIRITHOUS.
Though I know
His ocean needs not my poor drops, yet they
Must yield their tribute there. My precious maid,
Those best affections that the heavens infuse
In their best-tempered pieces keep enthroned
In your dear heart!

EMILIA.
Thanks, sir. Remember me
To our all-royal brother, for whose speed
The great Bellona Ill solicit; and
Since in our terrene state petitions are not
Without gifts understood, Ill offer to her
What I shall be advised she likes. Our hearts
Are in his army, in his tent.

HIPPOLYTA.
In s bosom.
We have been soldiers, and we cannot weep
When our friends don their helms, or put to sea,
Or tell of babes broached on the lance, or women
That have sod their infants inand after eat them
The brine they wept at killing em. Then if
You stay to see of us such spinsters, we
Should hold you here for ever.

PIRITHOUS.
Peace be to you
As I pursue this war, which shall be then
 Beyond further requiring.

[_Exit Pirithous._]

EMILIA.
How his longing
Follows his friend! Since his depart, his sports,
Though craving seriousness and skill, passed slightly
His careless execution, where nor gain
Made him regard, or loss consider, but
Playing one business in his hand, another
Directing in his head, his mind nurse equal
To these so differing twins. Have you observed him
Since our great lord departed?

HIPPOLYTA.
With much labour,
And I did love him for t. They two have cabined
In many as dangerous as poor a corner,
Peril and want contending; they have skiffed
Torrents whose roaring tyranny and power
I th least of these was dreadful; and they have
Fought out together where Deaths self was lodged;
Yet fate hath brought them off. Their knot of love,
Tied, weaved, entangled, with so true, so long,
And with a finger of so deep a cunning,
May be outworn, never undone. I think
Theseus cannot be umpire to himself,
Cleaving his conscience into twain and doing
Each side like justice, which he loves best.

EMILIA.
Doubtless
There is a best, and reason has no manners
To say it is not you. I was acquainted
Once with a time when I enjoyed a playfellow;
You were at wars when she the grave enriched,
Who made too proud the bed, took leave o th moon
Which then looked pale at parting, when our count
Was each eleven.

HIPPOLYTA.
Twas Flavina.

EMILIA.
Yes.
You talk of Pirithous and Theseus love.
Theirs has more ground, is more maturely seasoned,
More buckled with strong judgement, and their needs
The one of th other may be said to water
Their intertangled roots of love; but I,
And she I sigh and spoke of, were things innocent,
Loved for we did, and like the elements
That know not what nor why, yet do effect
Rare issues by their operance, our souls
Did so to one another. What she liked
Was then of me approved, what not, condemned,
No more arraignment. The flower that I would pluck
And put between my breasts, O, then but beginning
To swell about the blossomshe would long
Till she had such another, and commit it
To the like innocent cradle, where, phnix-like,
They died in perfume. On my head no toy
But was her pattern; her affectionspretty,
Though haply her careless wearI followed
For my most serious decking; had mine ear
Stoln some new air, or at adventure hummed one
From musical coinage, why, it was a note
Whereon her spirits would sojournrather, dwell on,
And sing it in her slumbers. This rehearsal,
Which fury-innocent wots well, comes in
Like old importments bastardhas this end,
That the true love tween maid and maid may be
More than in sex individual.

HIPPOLYTA.
Youre out of breath;
And this high-speeded pace is but to say
That you shall never, like the maid Flavina,
Love any thats called man.

EMILIA.
I am sure I shall not.

HIPPOLYTA.
Now, alack, weak sister,
I must no more believe thee in this point
Though in t I know thou dost believe thyself
Than I will trust a sickly appetite,
That loathes even as it longs. But sure, my sister,
If I were ripe for your persuasion, you
Have said enough to shake me from the arm
Of the all-noble Theseus; for whose fortunes
I will now in and kneel, with great assurance
That we, more than his Pirithous, possess
The high throne in his heart.

EMILIA.
I am not
Against your faith, yet I continue mine.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A field before Thebes.

Cornets. A battle struck within; then a retreat. Flourish. Then enter,
Theseus, as victor, with a Herald, other Lords, and Soldiers. The three
Queens meet him and fall on their faces before him.

FIRST QUEEN.
To thee no star be dark!

SECOND QUEEN.
Both heaven and earth
Friend thee for ever!

THIRD QUEEN.
All the good that may
Be wished upon thy head, I cry Amen to t!

THESEUS.
Th impartial gods, who from the mounted heavens
View us their mortal herd, behold who err
And, in their time, chastise. Go and find out
The bones of your dead lords and honour them
With treble ceremony, rather than a gap
Should be in their dear rites, we would supply t,
But those we will depute which shall invest
You in your dignities and even each thing
Our haste does leave imperfect. So, adieu,
And heavens good eyes look on you.

[_Exeunt Queens._]

Enter a Herald and Soldiers bearing Palamon and Arcite on hearses.

What are those?

HERALD.
Men of great quality, as may be judged
By their appointment. Some of Thebes have told s
They are sisters children, nephews to the King.

THESEUS.
By th helm of Mars, I saw them in the war,
Like to a pair of lions, smeared with prey,
Make lanes in troops aghast. I fixed my note
Constantly on them, for they were a mark
Worth a gods view. What prisoner was t that told me
When I enquired their names?

HERALD.
Wi leave, theyre called Arcite and Palamon.

THESEUS.
Tis right; those, those. They are not dead?

HERALD.
Nor in a state of life. Had they been taken
When their last hurts were given, twas possible
They might have been recovered; yet they breathe
And have the name of men.

THESEUS.
Then like men use em.
The very lees of such, millions of rates,
Exceed the wine of others. All our surgeons
Convent in their behoof; our richest balms,
Rather than niggard, waste. Their lives concern us
Much more than Thebes is worth. Rather than have em
Freed of this plight, and in their morning state,
Sound and at liberty, I would em dead;
But forty-thousandfold we had rather have em
Prisoners to us than death. Bear em speedily
From our kind air, to them unkind, and minister
What man to man may do, for our sake, more,
Since I have known frights, fury, friends behests,
Loves provocations, zeal, a mistress task,
Desire of liberty, a fever, madness,
Hath set a mark which nature could not reach to
Without some imposition, sickness in will
Oer-wrestling strength in reason. For our love
And great Apollos mercy, all our best
Their best skill tender. Lead into the city,
Where, having bound things scattered, we will post
To Athens fore our army.

[_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another part of the same, more remote from Thebes

Music. Enter the Queens with the hearses of their knights, in a funeral
solemnity, &c.

SONG.


_Urns and odours bring away;
Vapours, sighs, darken the day;
Our dole more deadly looks than dying;
Balms and gums and heavy cheers,
Sacred vials filled with tears,
And clamours through the wild air flying._

_Come, all sad and solemn shows
That are quick-eyed Pleasures foes;
We convent naught else but woes.
We convent naught else but woes._

THIRD QUEEN.
This funeral path brings to your households grave.
Joy seize on you again; peace sleep with him.

SECOND QUEEN.
And this to yours.

FIRST QUEEN.
Yours this way. Heavens lend
A thousand differing ways to one sure end.

THIRD QUEEN.
This worlds a city full of straying streets,
And deaths the market-place where each one meets.

[_Exeunt severally._]




ACT II

SCENE I. Athens. A garden, with a castle in the background


Enter Jailer and Wooer.

JAILER.
I may depart with little while I live; something I may cast to you, not
much. Alas, the prison I keep, though it be for great ones, yet they
seldom come; before one salmon, you shall take a number of minnows. I
am given out to be better lined than it can appear to me report is a
true speaker. I would I were really that I am delivered to be. Marry,
what I have, be it what it will, I will assure upon my daughter at the
day of my death.

WOOER.
Sir, I demand no more than your own offer, and I will estate your
daughter in what I have promised.

JAILER.
Well, we will talk more of this when the solemnity is past. But have
you a full promise of her? When that shall be seen, I tender my
consent.

Enter the Jailers Daughter, carrying rushes.

WOOER.
I have sir. Here she comes.

JAILER.
Your friend and I have chanced to name you here, upon the old business.
But no more of that now; so soon as the court hurry is over, we will
have an end of it. I th meantime, look tenderly to the two prisoners.
I can tell you they are princes.

DAUGHTER.
These strewings are for their chamber. Tis pity they are in prison,
and twere pity they should be out. I do think they have patience to
make any adversity ashamed. The prison itself is proud of em, and they
have all the world in their chamber.

JAILER.
They are famed to be a pair of absolute men.

DAUGHTER.
By my troth, I think fame but stammers em; they stand a grise above
the reach of report.

JAILER.
I heard them reported in the battle to be the only doers.

DAUGHTER.
Nay, most likely, for they are noble sufferers. I marvel how they would
have looked had they been victors, that with such a constant nobility
enforce a freedom out of bondage, making misery their mirth and
affliction a toy to jest at.

JAILER.
Do they so?

DAUGHTER.
It seems to me they have no more sense of their captivity than I of
ruling Athens. They eat well, look merrily, discourse of many things,
but nothing of their own restraint and disasters. Yet sometime a
divided sigh, martyred as twere i th deliverance, will break from
one of themwhen the other presently gives it so sweet a rebuke that I
could wish myself a sigh to be so chid, or at least a sigher to be
comforted.

WOOER.
I never saw em.

JAILER.
The Duke himself came privately in the night, and so did they.

Enter Palamon and Arcite, above.

What the reason of it is, I know not. Look, yonder they are; thats
Arcite looks out.

DAUGHTER.
No, sir, no, thats Palamon. Arcite is the lower of the twain; you may
perceive a part of him.

JAILER.
Go to, leave your pointing; they would not make us their object. Out of
their sight.

DAUGHTER.
It is a holiday to look on them. Lord, the difference of men!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The prison

Enter Palamon and Arcite in prison.

PALAMON.
How do you, noble cousin?

ARCITE.
How do you, sir?

PALAMON.
Why, strong enough to laugh at misery
And bear the chance of war; yet we are prisoners
I fear for ever, cousin.

ARCITE.
I believe it,
And to that destiny have patiently
Laid up my hour to come.

PALAMON.
O, cousin Arcite,
Where is Thebes now? Where is our noble country?
Where are our friends and kindreds? Never more
Must we behold those comforts, never see
The hardy youths strive for the games of honour,
Hung with the painted favours of their ladies,
Like tall ships under sail; then start amongst em,
And as an east wind leave em all behind us,
Like lazy clouds, whilst Palamon and Arcite,
Even in the wagging of a wanton leg,
Outstripped the peoples praises, won the garlands,
Ere they have time to wish em ours. O, never
Shall we two exercise, like twins of honour,
Our arms again, and feel our fiery horses
Like proud seas under us! Our good swords now
Better the red-eyed god of war neer wore
Ravished our sides, like age must run to rust
And deck the temples of those gods that hate us;
These hands shall never draw em out like lightning
To blast whole armies more.

ARCITE.
No, Palamon,
Those hopes are prisoners with us. Here we are,
And here the graces of our youths must wither
Like a too-timely spring; here age must find us
And, which is heaviest, Palamon, unmarried.
The sweet embraces of a loving wife,
Loaden with kisses, armed with thousand Cupids,
Shall never clasp our necks; no issue know us,
No figures of ourselves shall we eer see,
To glad our age, and like young eagles teach em
Boldly to gaze against bright arms and say
Remember what your fathers were, and conquer!
The fair-eyed maids shall weep our banishments
And in their songs curse ever-blinded Fortune
Till she for shame see what a wrong she has done
To youth and nature. This is all our world.
We shall know nothing here but one another,
Hear nothing but the clock that tells our woes.
The vine shall grow, but we shall never see it;
Summer shall come, and with her all delights,
But dead-cold winter must inhabit here still.

PALAMON.
Tis too true, Arcite. To our Theban hounds
That shook the aged forest with their echoes
No more now must we hallow, no more shake
Our pointed javelins whilst the angry swine
Flies like a Parthian quiver from our rages,
Struck with our well-steeled darts. All valiant uses,
The food and nourishment of noble minds,
In us two here shall perish; we shall die,
Which is the curse of honour, lastly,
Children of grief and ignorance.

ARCITE.
Yet, cousin,
Even from the bottom of these miseries,
From all that fortune can inflict upon us,
I see two comforts rising, two mere blessings,
If the gods please: to hold here a brave patience,
And the enjoying of our griefs together.
Whilst Palamon is with me, let me perish
If I think this our prison!

PALAMON.
Certainly
Tis a main goodness, cousin, that our fortunes
Were twined together; tis most true, two souls
Put in two noble bodies, let em suffer
The gall of hazard, so they grow together,
Will never sink; they must not, say they could.
A willing man dies sleeping and alls done.

ARCITE.
Shall we make worthy uses of this place
That all men hate so much?

PALAMON.
How, gentle cousin?

ARCITE.
Lets think this prison holy sanctuary,
To keep us from corruption of worse men.
We are young and yet desire the ways of honour;
That liberty and common conversation,
The poison of pure spirits, might like women,
Woo us to wander from. What worthy blessing
Can be but our imaginations
May make it ours? And here being thus together,
We are an endless mine to one another;
We are one anothers wife, ever begetting
New births of love; we are father, friends, acquaintance;
We are, in one another, families;
I am your heir, and you are mine. This place
Is our inheritance; no hard oppressor
Dare take this from us; here with a little patience
We shall live long and loving. No surfeits seek us;
The hand of war hurts none here, nor the seas
Swallow their youth. Were we at liberty,
A wife might part us lawfully, or business;
Quarrels consume us; envy of ill men
Crave our acquaintance. I might sicken, cousin,
Where you should never know it, and so perish
Without your noble hand to close mine eyes,
Or prayers to the gods. A thousand chances,
Were we from hence, would sever us.

PALAMON.
You have made me
I thank you, cousin Arcitealmost wanton
With my captivity. What a misery
It is to live abroad and everywhere!
Tis like a beast, methinks. I find the court here,
I am sure, a more content; and all those pleasures
That woo the wills of men to vanity
I see through now, and am sufficient
To tell the world tis but a gaudy shadow
That old Time as he passes by takes with him.
What had we been, old in the court of Creon,
Where sin is justice, lust and ignorance
The virtues of the great ones? Cousin Arcite,
Had not the loving gods found this place for us,
We had died as they do, ill old men, unwept,
And had their epitaphs, the peoples curses.
Shall I say more?

ARCITE.
I would hear you still.

PALAMON.
Ye shall.
Is there record of any two that loved
Better than we do, Arcite?

ARCITE.
Sure, there cannot.

PALAMON.
I do not think it possible our friendship
Should ever leave us.

ARCITE.
Till our deaths it cannot;

Enter Emilia and her Woman, below.

And after death our spirits shall be led
To those that love eternally. Speak on, sir.

EMILIA.
This garden has a world of pleasures int.
What flower is this?

WOMAN.
Tis called narcissus, madam.

EMILIA.
That was a fair boy, certain, but a fool,
To love himself. Were there not maids enough?

ARCITE.
Pray, forward.

PALAMON.
Yes.

EMILIA.
Or were they all hard-hearted?

WOMAN.
They could not be to one so fair.

EMILIA.
Thou wouldst not.

WOMAN.
I think I should not, madam.

EMILIA.
Thats a good wench.
But take heed to your kindness, though.

WOMAN.
Why, madam?

EMILIA.
Men are mad things.

ARCITE.
Will ye go forward, cousin?

EMILIA.
Canst not thou work such flowers in silk, wench?

WOMAN.
Yes.

EMILIA.
Ill have a gown full of em, and of these.
This is a pretty colour; will t not do
Rarely upon a skirt, wench?

WOMAN.
Dainty, madam.

ARCITE.
Cousin, cousin! How do you, sir? Why, Palamon!

PALAMON.
Never till now I was in prison, Arcite.

ARCITE.
Why, whats the matter, man?

PALAMON.
Behold, and wonder!
By heaven, she is a goddess.

ARCITE.
Ha!

PALAMON.
Do reverence. She is a goddess, Arcite.

EMILIA.
Of all flowers,
Methinks a rose is best.

WOMAN.
Why, gentle madam?

EMILIA.
It is the very emblem of a maid.
For when the west wind courts her gently,
How modestly she blows and paints the sun
With her chaste blushes! When the north comes near her,
Rude and impatient, then, like chastity,
She locks her beauties in her bud again,
And leaves him to base briers.

WOMAN.
Yet, good madam,
Sometimes her modesty will blow so far
She falls for t. A maid,
If she have any honour, would be loath
To take example by her.

EMILIA.
Thou art wanton.

ARCITE.
She is wondrous fair.

PALAMON.
She is all the beauty extant.

EMILIA.
The sun grows high; lets walk in. Keep these flowers.
Well see how near art can come near their colours.
I am wondrous merry-hearted. I could laugh now.

WOMAN.
I could lie down, I am sure.

EMILIA.
And take one with you?

WOMAN.
Thats as we bargain, madam.

EMILIA.
Well, agree then.

[_Exeunt Emilia and Woman._]

PALAMON.
What think you of this beauty?

ARCITE.
Tis a rare one.

PALAMON.
Ist but a rare one?

ARCITE.
Yes, a matchless beauty.

PALAMON.
Might not a man well lose himself, and love her?

ARCITE.
I cannot tell what you have done; I have,
Beshrew mine eyes fort! Now I feel my shackles.

PALAMON.
You love her, then?

ARCITE.
Who would not?

PALAMON.
And desire her?

ARCITE.
Before my liberty.

PALAMON.
I saw her first.

ARCITE.
Thats nothing.

PALAMON.
But it shall be.

ARCITE.
I saw her too.

PALAMON.
Yes, but you must not love her.

ARCITE.
I will not, as you do, to worship her
As she is heavenly and a blessed goddess.
I love her as a woman, to enjoy her.
So both may love.

PALAMON.
You shall not love at all.

ARCITE.
Not love at all! Who shall deny me?

PALAMON.
I, that first saw her; I that took possession
First with mine eye of all those beauties in her
Revealed to mankind. If thou lovest her,
Or entertainst a hope to blast my wishes,
Thou art a traitor, Arcite, and a fellow
False as thy title to her. Friendship, blood,
And all the ties between us, I disclaim
If thou once think upon her.

ARCITE.
Yes, I love her;
And, if the lives of all my name lay on it,
I must do so; I love her with my soul.
If that will lose ye, farewell, Palamon.
I say again, I love, and in loving her maintain
I am as worthy and as free a lover
And have as just a title to her beauty,
As any Palamon, or any living
That is a mans son.

PALAMON.
Have I called thee friend?

ARCITE.
Yes, and have found me so. Why are you moved thus?
Let me deal coldly with you: am not I
Part of your blood, part of your soul? You have told me
That I was Palamon and you were Arcite.

PALAMON.
Yes.

ARCITE.
Am not I liable to those affections,
Those joys, griefs, angers, fears, my friend shall suffer?

PALAMON.
Ye may be.

ARCITE.
Why then would you deal so cunningly,
So strangely, so unlike a noble kinsman,
To love alone? Speak truly; do you think me
Unworthy of her sight?

PALAMON.
No; but unjust,
If thou pursue that sight.

ARCITE.
Because another
First sees the enemy, shall I stand still
And let mine honour down, and never charge?

PALAMON.
Yes, if he be but one.

ARCITE.
But say that one
Had rather combat me?

PALAMON.
Let that one say so,
And use thy freedom. Else, if thou pursuest her,
Be as that cursed man that hates his country,
A branded villain.

ARCITE.
You are mad.

PALAMON.
I must be,
Till thou art worthy, Arcite; it concerns me;
And in this madness, if I hazard thee
And take thy life, I deal but truely.

ARCITE.
Fie, sir!
You play the child extremely. I will love her;
I must, I ought to do so, and I dare,
And all this justly.

PALAMON.
O, that now, that now,
Thy false self and thy friend had but this fortune,
To be one hour at liberty, and grasp
Our good swords in our hands! I would quickly teach thee
What twere to filch affection from another!
Thou art baser in it than a cutpurse.
Put but thy head out of this window more
And, as I have a soul, Ill nail thy life to t.

ARCITE.
Thou darst not, fool, thou canst not, thou art feeble.
Put my head out? Ill throw my body out
And leap the garden, when I see her next
And pitch between her arms, to anger thee.

Enter Jailer.

PALAMON.
No more; the keepers coming. I shall live
To knock thy brains out with my shackles.

ARCITE.
Do!

JAILER.
By your leave, gentlemen.

PALAMON.
Now, honest keeper?

JAILER.
Lord Arcite, you must presently to th Duke;
The cause I know not yet.

ARCITE.
I am ready, keeper.

JAILER.
Prince Palamon, I must awhile bereave you
Of your fair cousins company.

[_Exeunt Arcite and Jailer._]

PALAMON.
And me too,
Even when you please, of life.Why is he sent for?
It may be he shall marry her; hes goodly,
And like enough the Duke hath taken notice
Both of his blood and body. But his falsehood!
Why should a friend be treacherous? If that
Get him a wife so noble and so fair,
Let honest men neer love again. Once more
I would but see this fair one. Blessed garden
And fruit and flowers more blessed that still blossom
As her bright eyes shine on ye! Would I were,
For all the fortune of my life hereafter,
Yon little tree, yon blooming apricock!
How I would spread and fling my wanton arms
In at her window! I would bring her fruit
Fit for the gods to feed on; youth and pleasure
Still as she tasted should be doubled on her;
And, if she be not heavenly, I would make her
So near the gods in nature, they should fear her.

Enter Jailer.

And then I am sure she would love me. How now, keeper?
Wheres Arcite?

JAILER.
Banished. Prince Pirithous
Obtained his liberty, but never more
Upon his oath and life must he set foot
Upon this kingdom.

PALAMON.
Hes a blessed man.
He shall see Thebes again, and call to arms
The bold young men that, when he bids em charge,
Fall on like fire. Arcite shall have a fortune,
If he dare make himself a worthy lover,
Yet in the field to strike a battle for her;
And, if he lose her then, hes a cold coward.
How bravely may he bear himself to win her
If he be noble Arcite, thousand ways!
Were I at liberty, I would do things
Of such a virtuous greatness that this lady,
This blushing virgin, should take manhood to her
And seek to ravish me.

JAILER.
My lord for you
I have this charge to

PALAMON.
To discharge my life?

JAILER.
No, but from this place to remove your lordship;
The windows are too open.

PALAMON.
Devils take em,
That are so envious to me! Prithee, kill me.

JAILER.
And hang fort afterward!

PALAMON.
By this good light,
Had I a sword I would kill thee.

JAILER.
Why, my Lord?

PALAMON.
Thou bringst such pelting, scurvy news continually,
Thou art not worthy life. I will not go.

JAILER.
Indeed, you must, my lord.

PALAMON.
May I see the garden?

JAILER.
No.

PALAMON.
Then I am resolved, I will not go.

JAILER.
I must constrain you then; and, for you are dangerous,
Ill clap more irons on you.

PALAMON.
Do, good keeper.
Ill shake em so, ye shall not sleep;
Ill make you a new morris. Must I go?

JAILER.
There is no remedy.

PALAMON.
Farewell, kind window.
May rude wind never hurt thee!O, my lady,
If ever thou hast felt what sorrow was,
Dream how I suffer.Come, now bury me.

[_Exeunt Palamon and Jailer._]

SCENE III. The country near Athens

Enter Arcite.

ARCITE.
Banished the kingdom? Tis a benefit,
A mercy I must thank em for; but banished
The free enjoying of that face I die for,
O, twas a studied punishment, a death
Beyond imagination, such a vengeance
That, were I old and wicked, all my sins
Could never pluck upon me. Palamon,
Thou hast the start now; thou shalt stay and see
Her bright eyes break each morning gainst thy window
And let in life into thee; thou shalt feed
Upon the sweetness of a noble beauty
That nature neer exceeded nor neer shall.
Good gods, what happiness has Palamon!
Twenty to one, hell come to speak to her;
And if she be as gentle as shes fair,
I know shes his; he has a tongue will tame
Tempests and make the wild rocks wanton.
Come what can come,
The worst is death; I will not leave the kingdom.
I know mine own is but a heap of ruins,
And no redress there. If I go, he has her.
I am resolved another shape shall make me
Or end my fortunes. Either way I am happy.
Ill see her and be near her, or no more.

Enter four Countrymen, and one with a garland before them.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN.
My masters, Ill be there, thats certain.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN.
And Ill be there.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN.
And I.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN.
Why, then, have with you, boys. Tis but a chiding.
Let the plough play today; Ill tickle t out
Of the jades tails tomorrow.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN.
I am sure
To have my wife as jealous as a turkey,
But thats all one. Ill go through; let her mumble.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN.
Clap her aboard tomorrow night, and stow her,
And alls made up again.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN.
Ay, do but put
A fescue in her fist and you shall see her
Take a new lesson out and be a good wench.
Do we all hold against the Maying?

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN.
Hold?
What should ail us?

THIRD COUNTRYMAN.
Arcas will be there.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN.
And Sennois.
And Rycas; and three better lads neer danced
Under green tree. And ye know what wenches, ha?
But will the dainty domine, the schoolmaster,
Keep touch, do you think? For he does all, ye know.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN.
Hell eat a hornbook ere he fail. Go to;
The matters too far driven between him
And the tanners daughter to let slip now;
And she must see the Duke, and she must dance too.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN.
Shall we be lusty?

SECOND COUNTRYMAN.
All the boys in Athens
Blow wind i th breech on s. And here Ill be,
And there Ill be, for our town, and here again,
And there again. Ha, boys, hey for the weavers!

FIRST COUNTRYMAN.
This must be done i th woods.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN.
O, pardon me.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN.
By any means; our thing of learning says so
Where he himself will edify the Duke
Most parlously in our behalfs. Hes excellent i th woods;
Bring him to th plains, his learning makes no cry.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN.
Well see the sports, then every man to s tackle;
And, sweet companions, lets rehearse, by any means,
Before the ladies see us, and do sweetly,
And God knows what may come on t.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN.
Content; the sports once ended, well perform.
Away, boys, and hold.

ARCITE.
By your leaves, honest friends: pray you, whither go you?

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN.
Whither? Why, what a questions that?

ARCITE.
Yes, tis a question
To me that know not.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN.
To the games, my friend.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN.
Where were you bred, you know it not?

ARCITE.
Not far, sir;
Are there such games today?

FIRST COUNTRYMAN.
Yes, marry, are there,
And such as you never saw; the Duke himself
Will be in person there.

ARCITE.
What pastimes are they?

SECOND COUNTRYMAN.
Wrestling, and running.Tis a pretty fellow.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN.
Thou wilt not go along?

ARCITE.
Not yet, sir.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN.
Well, sir,
Take your own time. Come, boys.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN.
My mind misgives me,
This fellow has a vengeance trick o th hip;
Mark how his bodys made for t.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN.
Ill be hanged, though,
If he dare venture. Hang him, plum porridge!
He wrestle? He roast eggs! Come, lets be gone, lads.

[_Exeunt Countrymen._]

ARCITE.
This is an offered opportunity
I durst not wish for. Well I could have wrestled
The best men called it excellentand run
Swifter than wind upon a field of corn,
Curling the wealthy ears, never flew. Ill venture,
And in some poor disguise be there. Who knows
Whether my brows may not be girt with garlands,
And happiness prefer me to a place
Where I may ever dwell in sight of her?

[_Exit Arcite._]

SCENE IV. Athens. A room in the prison

Enter Jailers Daughter alone.

DAUGHTER.
Why should I love this gentleman? Tis odds
He never will affect me. I am base,
My father the mean keeper of his prison,
And he a prince. To marry him is hopeless;
To be his whore is witless. Out upon t!
What pushes are we wenches driven to
When fifteen once has found us! First, I saw him;
I, seeing, thought he was a goodly man;
He has as much to please a woman in him,
If he please to bestow it so, as ever
These eyes yet looked on. Next, I pitied him,
And so would any young wench, o my conscience,
That ever dreamed, or vowed her maidenhead
To a young handsome man. Then I loved him,
Extremely loved him, infinitely loved him!
And yet he had a cousin, fair as he too,
But in my heart was Palamon, and there,
Lord, what a coil he keeps! To hear him
Sing in an evening, what a heaven it is!
And yet his songs are sad ones. Fairer spoken
Was never gentleman. When I come in
To bring him water in a morning, first
He bows his noble body, then salutes me thus:
Fair, gentle maid, good morrow. May thy goodness
Get thee a happy husband. Once he kissed me;
I loved my lips the better ten days after.
Would he would do so evry day! He grieves much
And me as much to see his misery.
What should I do to make him know I love him?
For I would fain enjoy him. Say I ventured
To set him free? What says the law then?
Thus much for law or kindred! I will do it;
And this night, or tomorrow, he shall love me.

[_Exit._]

SCENE V. An open place in Athens

A short flourish of cornets and shouts within. Enter Theseus,
Hippolyta, Pirithous, Emilia; Arcite in disguise as a countryman, with
a garland, Attendants, and others.

THESEUS.
You have done worthily. I have not seen,
Since Hercules, a man of tougher sinews.
Whateer you are, you run the best and wrestle,
That these times can allow.

ARCITE.
I am proud to please you.

THESEUS.
What country bred you?

ARCITE.
This; but far off, Prince.

THESEUS.
Are you a gentleman?

ARCITE.
My father said so;
And to those gentle uses gave me life.

THESEUS.
Are you his heir?

ARCITE.
His youngest, sir.

THESEUS.
Your father
Sure is a happy sire then. What profess you?

ARCITE.
A little of all noble qualities.
I could have kept a hawk and well have hallowed
To a deep cry of dogs. I dare not praise
My feat in horsemanship, yet they that knew me
Would say it was my best piece; last, and greatest,
I would be thought a soldier.

THESEUS.
You are perfect.

PIRITHOUS.
Upon my soul, a proper man.

EMILIA.
He is so.

PIRITHOUS.
How do you like him, lady?

HIPPOLYTA.
I admire him.
I have not seen so young a man so noble,
If he say true, of his sort.

EMILIA.
Believe,
His mother was a wondrous handsome woman;
His face, methinks, goes that way.

HIPPOLYTA.
But his body
And fiery mind illustrate a brave father.

PIRITHOUS.
Mark how his virtue, like a hidden sun,
Breaks through his baser garments.

HIPPOLYTA.
Hes well got, sure.

THESEUS.
What made you seek this place, sir?

ARCITE.
Noble Theseus,
To purchase name and do my ablest service
To such a well-found wonder as thy worth;
For only in thy court, of all the world,
Dwells fair-eyed Honour.

PIRITHOUS.
All his words are worthy.

THESEUS.
Sir, we are much indebted to your travel,
Nor shall you lose your wish.Pirithous,
Dispose of this fair gentleman.

PIRITHOUS.
Thanks, Theseus.
Whateer you are, youre mine, and I shall give you
To a most noble service: to this lady,
This bright young virgin; pray, observe her goodness.
You have honoured her fair birthday with your virtues,
And, as your due, youre hers; kiss her fair hand, sir.

ARCITE.
Sir, youre a noble giver.Dearest beauty,
Thus let me seal my vowed faith.

[_He kisses her hand._]

When your servant,
Your most unworthy creature, but offends you,
Command him die, he shall.

EMILIA.
That were too cruel.
If you deserve well, sir, I shall soon see t.
Youre mine, and somewhat better than your rank
Ill use you.

PIRITHOUS.
Ill see you furnished, and because you say
You are a horseman, I must needs entreat you
This afternoon to ride, but tis a rough one.

ARCITE.
I like him better, Prince; I shall not then
Freeze in my saddle.

THESEUS.
Sweet, you must be ready,
And you, Emilia,and you, friend,and all,
Tomorrow by the sun, to do observance
To flowery May, in Dians wood.Wait well, sir,
Upon your mistress.Emily, I hope
He shall not go afoot.

EMILIA.
That were a shame, sir,
While I have horses.Take your choice, and what
You want at any time, let me but know it.
If you serve faithfully, I dare assure you
Youll find a loving mistress.

ARCITE.
If I do not,
Let me find that my father ever hated,
Disgrace and blows.

THESEUS.
Go lead the way; you have won it.
It shall be so; you shall receive all dues
Fit for the honour you have won; twere wrong else.
Sister, beshrew my heart, you have a servant,
That, if I were a woman, would be master.
But you are wise.

EMILIA.
I hope too wise for that, sir.

[_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Athens. Before the prison

Enter Jailers Daughter alone.

DAUGHTER.
Let all the dukes and all the devils roar,
He is at liberty! I have ventured for him
And out I have brought him; to a little wood
A mile hence I have sent him, where a cedar
Higher than all the rest spreads like a plane
Fast by a brook, and there he shall keep close
Till I provide him files and food, for yet
His iron bracelets are not off. O Love,
What a stout-hearted child thou art! My father
Durst better have endured cold iron than done it.
I love him beyond love and beyond reason,
Or wit, or safety. I have made him know it;
I care not, I am desperate. If the law
Find me and then condemn me for t, some wenches,
Some honest-hearted maids, will sing my dirge
And tell to memory my death was noble,
Dying almost a martyr. That way he takes,
I purpose is my way too. Sure he cannot
Be so unmanly as to leave me here.
If he do, maids will not so easily
Trust men again. And yet he has not thanked me
For what I have done; no, not so much as kissed me,
And that, methinks, is not so well; nor scarcely
Could I persuade him to become a free man,
He made such scruples of the wrong he did
To me and to my father. Yet I hope,
When he considers more, this love of mine
Will take more root within him. Let him do
What he will with me, so he use me kindly;
For use me so he shall, or Ill proclaim him,
And to his face, no man. Ill presently
Provide him necessaries and pack my clothes up,
And where there is a path of ground Ill venture,
So he be with me. By him, like a shadow
Ill ever dwell. Within this hour the hubbub
Will be all oer the prison. I am then
Kissing the man they look for. Farewell, father!
Get many more such prisoners and such daughters,
And shortly you may keep yourself. Now to him.

[_Exit._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A forest near Athens


Cornets in sundry places. Noise and hallowing as people a-Maying. Enter
Arcite alone.

ARCITE.
The Duke has lost Hippolyta; each took
A several land. This is a solemn rite
They owe bloomed May, and the Athenians pay it
To th heart of ceremony. O Queen Emilia,
Fresher than May, sweeter
Than her gold buttons on the boughs, or all
Th enameled knacks o th mead or gardenyea,
We challenge too the bank of any nymph
That makes the stream seem flowers; thou, O jewel
O th wood, o th world, hast likewise blessed a pace
With thy sole presence. In thy rumination
That I, poor man, might eftsoons come between
And chop on some cold thought! Thrice blessed chance
To drop on such a mistress, expectation
Most guiltless on t. Tell me, O Lady Fortune,
Next after Emily my sovereign, how far
I may be proud. She takes strong note of me,
Hath made me near her, and this beauteous morn,
The primst of all the year, presents me with
A brace of horses; two such steeds might well
Be by a pair of kings backed, in a field
That their crowns titles tried. Alas, alas,
Poor cousin Palamon, poor prisoner, thou
So little dreamst upon my fortune that
Thou thinkst thyself the happier thing, to be
So near Emilia; me thou deemst at Thebes,
And therein wretched, although free. But if
Thou knewst my mistress breathed on me, and that
I eared her language, lived in her eye, O coz,
What passion would enclose thee!

Enter Palamon as out of a bush, with his shackles; he bends his fist at
Arcite.

PALAMON.
Traitor kinsman,
Thou shouldst perceive my passion, if these signs
Of prisonment were off me, and this hand
But owner of a sword. By all oaths in one,
I and the justice of my love would make thee
A confessed traitor! O thou most perfidious
That ever gently looked, the voidst of honour
That eer bore gentle token, falsest cousin
That ever blood made kin! Callst thou her thine?
Ill prove it in my shackles, with these hands,
Void of appointment, that thou liest, and art
A very thief in love, a chaffy lord,
Nor worth the name of villain. Had I a sword,
And these house-clogs away

ARCITE.
Dear cousin Palamon

PALAMON.
Cozener Arcite, give me language such
As thou hast showed me feat.

ARCITE.
Not finding in
The circuit of my breast any gross stuff
To form me like your blazon holds me to
This gentleness of answer. Tis your passion
That thus mistakes, the which, to you being enemy,
Cannot to me be kind. Honour and honesty
I cherish and depend on, howsoeer
You skip them in me, and with them, fair coz,
Ill maintain my proceedings. Pray be pleased
To show in generous terms your griefs, since that
Your questions with your equal, who professes
To clear his own way with the mind and sword
Of a true gentleman.

PALAMON.
That thou durst, Arcite!

ARCITE.
My coz, my coz, you have been well advertised
How much I dare; youve seen me use my sword
Against th advice of fear. Sure, of another
You would not hear me doubted, but your silence
Should break out, though i th sanctuary.

PALAMON.
Sir,
I have seen you move in such a place, which well
Might justify your manhood; you were called
A good knight and a bold. But the whole weeks not fair
If any day it rain. Their valiant temper
Men lose when they incline to treachery;
And then they fight like compelled bears, would fly
Were they not tied.

ARCITE.
Kinsman, you might as well
Speak this and act it in your glass as to
His ear which now disdains you.

PALAMON.
Come up to me;
Quit me of these cold gyves, give me a sword
Though it be rusty, and the charity
Of one meal lend me. Come before me then,
A good sword in thy hand, and do but say
That Emily is thine, I will forgive
The trespass thou hast done me, yea, my life,
If then thou carry t; and brave souls in shades
That have died manly, which will seek of me
Some news from earth, they shall get none but this:
That thou art brave and noble.

ARCITE.
Be content.
Again betake you to your hawthorn house.
With counsel of the night, I will be here
With wholesome viands. These impediments
Will I file off; you shall have garments and
Perfumes to kill the smell o th prison. After,
When you shall stretch yourself and say but Arcite,
I am in plight, there shall be at your choice
Both sword and armour.

PALAMON.
Oh you heavens, dares any
So noble bear a guilty business? None
But only Arcite, therefore none but Arcite
In this kind is so bold.

ARCITE.
Sweet Palamon.

PALAMON.
I do embrace you and your offer; for
Your offer do t I only, sir; your person,
Without hypocrisy I may not wish
More than my swords edge on t.

[_Wind horns of cornets._]

ARCITE.
You hear the horns.
Enter your musit, lest this match between s
Be crossed ere met. Give me your hand; farewell.
Ill bring you every needful thing. I pray you,
Take comfort and be strong.

PALAMON.
Pray hold your promise,
And do the deed with a bent brow. Most certain
You love me not; be rough with me, and pour
This oil out of your language. By this air,
I could for each word give a cuff, my stomach
Not reconciled by reason.

ARCITE.
Plainly spoken.
Yet pardon me hard language. When I spur
My horse, I chide him not; content and anger
In me have but one face.

[_Wind horns._]

Hark, sir, they call
The scattered to the banquet. You must guess
I have an office there.

PALAMON.
Sir, your attendance
Cannot please heaven, and I know your office
Unjustly is achieved.

ARCITE.
Tis a good title.
I am persuaded, this question, sick between s,
By bleeding must be cured. I am a suitor
That to your sword you will bequeath this plea,
And talk of it no more.

PALAMON.
But this one word:
You are going now to gaze upon my mistress,
For, note you, mine she is

ARCITE.
Nay, then

PALAMON.
Nay, pray you,
You talk of feeding me to breed me strength.
You are going now to look upon a sun
That strengthens what it looks on; there
You have a vantage oer me. But enjoy t till
I may enforce my remedy. Farewell.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Another Part of the forest

Enter Jailers Daughter alone.

DAUGHTER.
He has mistook the brake I meant, is gone
After his fancy. Tis now well-nigh morning.
No matter; would it were perpetual night,
And darkness lord o th world. Hark, tis a wolf!
In me hath grief slain fear, and but for one thing,
I care for nothing, and thats Palamon.
I reck not if the wolves would jaw me, so
He had this file. What if I hallowed for him?
I cannot hallow. If I whooped, what then?
If he not answered, I should call a wolf,
And do him but that service. I have heard
Strange howls this livelong night; why may t not be
They have made prey of him? He has no weapons;
He cannot run; the jingling of his gyves
Might call fell things to listen, who have in them
A sense to know a man unarmed and can
Smell where resistance is. Ill set it down
Hes torn to pieces; they howled many together,
And then they fed on him. So much for that.
Be bold to ring the bell. How stand I then?
Alls chared when he is gone. No, no, I lie.
My fathers to be hanged for his escape;
Myself to beg, if I prized life so much
As to deny my act; but that I would not,
Should I try death by dozens. I am moped.
Food took I none these two days;
Sipped some water. I have not closed mine eyes
Save when my lids scoured off their brine. Alas,
Dissolve, my life! Let not my sense unsettle,
Lest I should drown, or stab, or hang myself.
O state of nature, fail together in me,
Since thy best props are warped! So, which way now?
The best way is the next way to a grave;
Each errant step beside is torment. Lo,
The moon is down, the crickets chirp, the screech owl
Calls in the dawn. All offices are done
Save what I fail in. But the point is this:
An end, and that is all.

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. The same part of the forest as in scene I.

Enter Arcite with meat, wine and files.

ARCITE.
I should be near the place.Ho! Cousin Palamon!

PALAMON.
[_From the bush._] Arcite?

ARCITE.
The same. I have brought you food and files.
Come forth and fear not; heres no Theseus.

Enter Palamon.

PALAMON.
Nor none so honest, Arcite.

ARCITE.
Thats no matter.
Well argue that hereafter. Come, take courage;
You shall not die thus beastly. Here, sir, drink
I know you are faintthen Ill talk further with you.

PALAMON.
Arcite, thou mightst now poison me.

ARCITE.
I might;
But I must fear you first. Sit down and, good now,
No more of these vain parleys; let us not,
Having our ancient reputation with us,
Make talk for fools and cowards. To your health.

[_Drinks._]

PALAMON.
Do.

ARCITE.
Pray sit down, then, and let me entreat you,
By all the honesty and honour in you,
No mention of this woman; twill disturb us.
We shall have time enough.

PALAMON.
Well, sir, Ill pledge you.

[_Drinks._]

ARCITE.
Drink a good hearty draught; it breeds good blood, man.
Do not you feel it thaw you?

PALAMON.
Stay, Ill tell you
After a draught or two more.

ARCITE.
Spare it not; the Duke has more, coz. Eat now.

PALAMON.
Yes.

[_Eats._]

ARCITE.
I am glad you have so good a stomach.

PALAMON.
I am gladder I have so good meat to t.

ARCITE.
Ist not mad lodging,
Here in the wild woods, cousin?

PALAMON.
Yes, for them
That have wild consciences.

ARCITE.
How tastes your victuals?
Your hunger needs no sauce, I see.

PALAMON.
Not much.
But if it did, yours is too tart, sweet cousin.
What is this?

ARCITE.
Venison.

PALAMON.
Tis a lusty meat.
Give me more wine. Here, Arcite, to the wenches
We have known in our days! The Lord Stewards daughter,
Do you remember her?

ARCITE.
After you, coz.

PALAMON.
She loved a black-haired man.

ARCITE.
She did so; well, sir?

PALAMON.
And I have heard some call him Arcite, and

ARCITE.
Out witht, faith.

PALAMON.
She met him in an arbour.
What did she there, coz? Play o th virginals?

ARCITE.
Something she did, sir.

PALAMON.
Made her groan a month for t,
Or two, or three, or ten.

ARCITE.
The Marshals sister
Had her share too, as I remember, cousin,
Else there be tales abroad. Youll pledge her?

PALAMON.
Yes.

ARCITE.
A pretty brown wench tis. There was a time
When young men went a-hunting, and a wood,
And a broad beech; and thereby hangs a tale.
Heigh ho!

PALAMON.
For Emily, upon my life! Fool,
Away with this strained mirth! I say again
That sigh was breathed for Emily. Base cousin,
Darst thou break first?

ARCITE.
You are wide.

PALAMON.
By heaven and earth,
Theres nothing in thee honest.

ARCITE.
Then Ill leave you.
You are a beast now.

PALAMON.
As thou makst me, traitor.

ARCITE.
Theres all things needful: files and shirts and perfumes.
Ill come again some two hours hence, and bring
That that shall quiet all.

PALAMON.
A sword and armour?

ARCITE.
Fear me not. You are now too foul. Farewell.
Get off your trinkets; you shall want naught.

PALAMON.
Sirrah

ARCITE.
Ill hear no more.

[_Exit._]

PALAMON.
If he keep touch, he dies for t.

[_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Another part of the forest

Enter Jailers Daughter.

DAUGHTER.
I am very cold, and all the stars are out too,
The little stars and all, that look like aglets.
The sun has seen my folly. Palamon!
Alas, no; hes in heaven. Where am I now?
Yonders the sea, and theres a ship; how t tumbles!
And theres a rock lies watching under water;
Now, now, it beats upon it; now, now, now,
Theres a leak sprung, a sound one! How they cry!
Run her before the wind, youll lose all else.
Up with a course or two, and tack about, boys!
Good night, good night; youre gone. I am very hungry.
Would I could find a fine frog; he would tell me
News from all parts o th world; then would I make
A carrack of a cockle shell, and sail
By east and north-east to the king of pygmies,
For he tells fortunes rarely. Now my father,
Twenty to one, is trussed up in a trice
Tomorrow morning. Ill say never a word.

[_Sings._]

_For Ill cut my green coat a foot above my knee,
And Ill clip my yellow locks an inch below mine eye.
Hey nonny, nonny, nonny.
Hes buy me a white cut, forth for to ride,
And Ill go seek him through the world that is so wide.
Hey nonny, nonny, nonny._
O, for a prick now, like a nightingale,
To put my breast against. I shall sleep like a top else.

[_Exit._]

SCENE V. Another part of the forest

Enter a Schoolmaster and five Countrymen, one dressed as a Bavian.

SCHOOLMASTER.
Fie, fie,
What tediosity and disinsanity
Is here among ye! Have my rudiments
Been laboured so long with ye, milked unto ye,
And, by a figure, even the very plum-broth
And marrow of my understanding laid upon ye,
And do you still cry Where? and How? and Wherefore?
You most coarse-frieze capacities, ye jean judgements,
Have I said Thus let be and There let be
And Then let be and no man understand me?
_Proh Deum, medius fidius_, ye are all dunces!
For why?
Here stand I; here the Duke comes; there are you,
Close in the thicket; the Duke appears; I meet him
And unto him I utter learned things
And many figures; he hears, and nods, and hums,
And then cries Rare! and I go forward. At length
I fling my cap upmark there! Then do you
As once did Meleager and the boar,
Break comely out before him; like true lovers,
Cast yourselves in a body decently,
And sweetly, by a figure, trace and turn, boys.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN.
And sweetly we will do it, Master Gerald.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN.
Draw up the company. Wheres the taborer?

THIRD COUNTRYMAN.
Why, Timothy!

TABORER.
Here, my mad boys, have at ye.

SCHOOLMASTER.
But I say, wheres their women?

Enter five Countrywomen.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN.
Heres Friz and Maudlin.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN.
And little Luce with the white legs, and bouncing Barbary.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN.
And freckled Nel, that never failed her master.

SCHOOLMASTER.
Where be your ribbons, maids? Swim with your bodies,
And carry it sweetly and deliverly,
And now and then a favour and a frisk.

NEL.
Let us alone, sir.

SCHOOLMASTER.
Wheres the rest o th music?

THIRD COUNTRYMAN.
Dispersed, as you commanded.

SCHOOLMASTER.
Couple, then,
And see whats wanting. Wheres the Bavian?
My friend, carry your tail without offence
Or scandal to the ladies; and be sure
You tumble with audacity and manhood;
And when you bark, do it with judgement.

BAVIAN.
Yes, sir.

SCHOOLMASTER.
_Quo usque tandem?_ Here is a woman wanting.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN.
We may go whistle; all the fats i th fire.

SCHOOLMASTER.
We have,
as learned authors utter, washed a tile.
we have been _fatuus_ and laboured vainly.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN.
This is that scornful piece, that scurvy hilding,
That gave her promise faithfully, she would be here,
Cicely, the sempsters daughter.
The next gloves that I give her shall be dogskin!
Nay an she fail me onceYou can tell, Arcas,
She swore by wine and bread, she would not break.

SCHOOLMASTER.
An eel and woman,
A learned poet says, unless by th tail
And with thy teeth thou hold, will either fail.
In manners this was false position.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN.
A fire ill take her; does she flinch now?

THIRD COUNTRYMAN.
What
Shall we determine, sir?

SCHOOLMASTER.
Nothing.
Our business is become a nullity,
Yea, and a woeful and a piteous nullity.

FOURTH COUNTRYMAN.
Now, when the credit of our town lay on it,
Now to be frampul, now to piss o th nettle!
Go thy ways; Ill remember thee. Ill fit thee.

Enter Jailers Daughter.

DAUGHTER.
[_Sings_.]
_The George Alow came from the south,
From the coast of Barbary-a.
And there he met with brave gallants of war,
By one, by two, by three-a._

_Well hailed, well hailed, you jolly gallants,
And whither now are you bound-a?
O let me have your company
Till I come to the sound-a._

_There was three fools fell out about an howlet:
The one said it was an owl,
The other he said nay,
The third he said it was a hawk,
And her bells were cut away._

THIRD COUNTRYMAN.
Theres a dainty mad woman, Master,
Comes i th nick, as mad as a March hare.
If we can get her dance, we are made again;
I warrant her, shell do the rarest gambols.

FIRST COUNTRYMAN.
A madwoman? We are made, boys.

SCHOOLMASTER.
And are you mad, good woman?

DAUGHTER.
I would be sorry else.
Give me your hand.

SCHOOLMASTER.
Why?

DAUGHTER.
I can tell your fortune.
You are a fool. Tell ten. I have posed him. Buzz!
Friend, you must eat no white bread; if you do,
Your teeth will bleed extremely. Shall we dance, ho?
I know you, youre a tinker; sirrah tinker,
Stop no more holes but what you should.

SCHOOLMASTER.
_Dii boni!_ A tinker, damsel?

DAUGHTER.
Or a conjurer.
Raise me a devil now, and let him play
_Qui passa_ o th bells and bones.

SCHOOLMASTER.
Go, take her,
And fluently persuade her to a peace.
_Et opus exegi, quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignis_
Strike up, and lead her in.

SECOND COUNTRYMAN.
Come, lass, lets trip it.

DAUGHTER.
Ill lead.

THIRD COUNTRYMAN.
Do, do!

SCHOOLMASTER.
Persuasively, and cunningly.
Away, boys; I hear the horns. Give me some meditation,
And mark your cue.

[_Exeunt all but Schoolmaster._]

Pallas inspire me.

Enter Theseus, Pirithous, Hippolyta, Emilia, and train.

THESEUS.
This way the stag took.

SCHOOLMASTER.
Stay, and edify!

THESEUS.
What have we here?

PIRITHOUS.
Some country sport, upon my life, sir.

THESEUS.
Well, sir, go forward; we will edify.
Ladies, sit down. Well stay it.

SCHOOLMASTER.
Thou doughty Duke, all hail! All hail, sweet ladies!

THESEUS.
This is a cold beginning.

SCHOOLMASTER.
If you but favour, our country pastime made is.
We are a few of those collected here
That ruder tongues distinguish villager.
And to say verity, and not to fable,
We are a merry rout, or else a _rabble_,
Or company, or by a figure, _chorus_,
That fore thy dignity will dance a morris.
And I that am the rectifier of all,
By title _pdagogus_, that let fall
The birch upon the breeches of the small ones,
And humble with a ferula the tall ones,
Do here present this machine, or this frame.
And, dainty Duke, whose doughty dismal fame
From Dis to Ddalus, from post to pillar,
Is blown abroad, help me, thy poor well-willer,
And with thy twinkling eyes look right and straight
Upon this mighty _Morr_, of mickle weight.
_Is_ now comes in, which being glued together
Makes _Morris_, and the cause that we came hither.
The body of our sport, of no small study.
I first appear, though rude and raw and muddy,
To speak before thy noble grace this tenner,
At whose great feet I offer up my penner.
The next, the Lord of May and Lady bright,
The Chambermaid and Servingman, by night
That seek out silent hanging; then mine Host
And his fat Spouse, that welcomes to their cost
The galled traveller, and with a beckning
Informs the tapster to inflame the reckning.
Then the beest-eating Clown and next the Fool,
The Bavian with long tail and eke long tool,
_Cum multis aliis_ that make a dance.
Say Ay, and all shall presently advance.

THESEUS.
Ay, ay, by any means, dear _Domine_.

PIRITHOUS.
Produce.

SCHOOLMASTER.
_Intrate, filii!_ Come forth and foot it.

Music. Enter the Countrymen, Countrywomen and Jailers Daughter; they
perform a morris dance.

Ladies, if we have been merry
And have pleased ye with a derry,
And a derry, and a down,
Say the schoolmasters no clown.
Duke, if we have pleased thee too
And have done as good boys should do,
Give us but a tree or twain
For a Maypole, and again,
Ere another year run out,
Well make thee laugh, and all this rout.

THESEUS.
Take twenty, _Domine_.How does my sweetheart?

HIPPOLYTA.
Never so pleased, sir.

EMILIA.
Twas an excellent dance,
And, for a preface, I never heard a better.

THESEUS.
Schoolmaster, I thank you.One seeem all rewarded.

PIRITHOUS.
And heres something to paint your pole withal.

[_He gives money._]

THESEUS.
Now to our sports again.

SCHOOLMASTER.
May the stag thou huntst stand long,
And thy dogs be swift and strong;
May they kill him without lets,
And the ladies eat his dowsets.

[_Exeunt Theseus, Pirithous, Hippolyta, Emilia, Arcite and Train. Horns
winded as they go out._]

Come, we are all made. _Dii deque omnes_,
You have danced rarely, wenches.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. The same part of the forest as in scene III.

Enter Palamon from the bush.

PALAMON.
About this hour my cousin gave his faith
To visit me again, and with him bring
Two swords and two good armours. If he fail,
Hes neither man nor soldier. When he left me,
I did not think a week could have restored
My lost strength to me, I was grown so low
And crestfalln with my wants. I thank thee, Arcite,
Thou art yet a fair foe, and I feel myself,
With this refreshing, able once again
To outdure danger. To delay it longer
Would make the world think, when it comes to hearing,
That I lay fatting like a swine to fight
And not a soldier. Therefore, this blest morning
Shall be the last; and that sword he refuses,
If it but hold, I kill him with. Tis justice.
So, love and fortune for me!

Enter Arcite with armours and swords.

O, good morrow.

ARCITE.
Good morrow, noble kinsman.

PALAMON.
I have put you
To too much pains, sir.

ARCITE.
That too much, fair cousin,
Is but a debt to honour, and my duty.

PALAMON.
Would you were so in all, sir; I could wish ye
As kind a kinsman as you force me find
A beneficial foe, that my embraces
Might thank ye, not my blows.

ARCITE.
I shall think either,
Well done, a noble recompence.

PALAMON.
Then I shall quit you.

ARCITE.
Defy me in these fair terms, and you show
More than a mistress to me. No more anger,
As you love anything thats honourable!
We were not bred to talk, man; when we are armed
And both upon our guards, then let our fury,
Like meeting of two tides, fly strongly from us;
And then to whom the birthright of this beauty
Truly pertainswithout upbraidings, scorns,
Despisings of our persons, and such poutings,
Fitter for girls and schoolboyswill be seen,
And quickly, yours or mine. Will t please you arm, sir?
Or, if you feel yourself not fitting yet
And furnished with your old strength, Ill stay, cousin,
And every day discourse you into health,
As I am spared. Your person I am friends with,
And I could wish I had not said I loved her,
Though I had died; but, loving such a lady,
And justifying my love, I must not fly from t.

PALAMON.
Arcite, thou art so brave an enemy,
That no man but thy cousins fit to kill thee.
I am well and lusty; choose your arms.

ARCITE.
Choose you, sir.

PALAMON.
Wilt thou exceed in all, or dost thou do it
To make me spare thee?

ARCITE.
If you think so, cousin,
You are deceived, for as I am a soldier,
I will not spare you.

PALAMON.
Thats well said.

ARCITE.
Youll find it.

PALAMON.
Then, as I am an honest man and love
With all the justice of affection,
Ill pay thee soundly.

[_He chooses armour._]

This Ill take.

ARCITE.
Thats mine, then.
Ill arm you first.

PALAMON.
Do.

[_Arcite begins arming him._]

Pray thee, tell me, cousin,
Where gotst thou this good armour?

ARCITE.
Tis the Dukes,
And, to say true, I stole it. Do I pinch you?

PALAMON.
No.

ARCITE.
Ist not too heavy?

PALAMON.
I have worn a lighter,
But I shall make it serve.

ARCITE.
Ill buckle t close.

PALAMON.
By any means.

ARCITE.
You care not for a grand guard?

PALAMON.
No, no; well use no horses: I perceive
You would fain be at that fight.

ARCITE.
I am indifferent.

PALAMON.
Faith, so am I. Good cousin, thrust the buckle
Through far enough.

ARCITE.
I warrant you.

PALAMON.
My casque now.

ARCITE.
Will you fight bare-armed?

PALAMON.
We shall be the nimbler.

ARCITE.
But use your gauntlets though. Those are o th least;
Prithee take mine, good cousin.

PALAMON.
Thank you, Arcite.
How do I look? Am I falln much away?

ARCITE.
Faith, very little; love has used you kindly.

PALAMON.
Ill warrant thee, Ill strike home.

ARCITE.
Do, and spare not.
Ill give you cause, sweet cousin.

PALAMON.
Now to you, sir.

[_He begins to arm Arcite._]

Methinks this armours very like that, Arcite,
Thou worst that day the three kings fell, but lighter.

ARCITE.
That was a very good one; and that day,
I well remember, you outdid me, cousin;
I never saw such valour. When you charged
Upon the left wing of the enemy,
I spurred hard to come up, and under me
I had a right good horse.

PALAMON.
You had indeed;
A bright bay, I remember.

ARCITE.
Yes, but all
Was vainly laboured in me; you outwent me,
Nor could my wishes reach you. Yet a little
I did by imitation.

PALAMON.
More by virtue;
You are modest, cousin.

ARCITE.
When I saw you charge first,
Me thought I heard a dreadful clap of thunder
Break from the troop.

PALAMON.
But still before that flew
The lightning of your valour. Stay a little;
Is not this piece too strait?

ARCITE.
No, no, tis well.

PALAMON.
I would have nothing hurt thee but my sword.
A bruise would be dishonour.

ARCITE.
Now I am perfect.

PALAMON.
Stand off, then.

ARCITE.
Take my sword; I hold it better.

PALAMON.
I thank ye, no; keep it; your life lies on it.
Heres one; if it but hold, I ask no more
For all my hopes. My cause and honour guard me!

ARCITE.
And me my love!

[_They bow several ways, then advance and stand._]

Is there aught else to say?

PALAMON.
This only, and no more. Thou art mine aunts son.
And that blood we desire to shed is mutual,
In me thine, and in thee mine. My sword
Is in my hand, and if thou killest me,
The gods and I forgive thee. If there be
A place prepared for those that sleep in honour,
I wish his weary soul that falls may win it.
Fight bravely, cousin; give me thy noble hand.

ARCITE.
Here, Palamon. This hand shall never more
Come near thee with such friendship.

PALAMON.
I commend thee.

ARCITE.
If I fall, curse me, and say I was a coward,
For none but such dare die in these just trials.
Once more farewell, my cousin.

PALAMON.
Farewell, Arcite.

[_They fight. Horns within. They stand_.]

ARCITE.
Lo, cousin, lo, our folly has undone us.

PALAMON.
Why?

ARCITE.
This is the Duke, a-hunting, as I told you.
If we be found, we are wretched. O, retire,
For honours sake and safety, presently
Into your bush again. Sir, we shall find
Too many hours to die in. Gentle cousin,
If you be seen, you perish instantly
For breaking prison and I, if you reveal me,
For my contempt. Then all the world will scorn us,
And say we had a noble difference,
But base disposers of it.

PALAMON.
No, no, cousin,
I will no more be hidden, nor put off
This great adventure to a second trial;
I know your cunning and I know your cause.
He that faints now, shame take him! Put thyself
Upon thy present guard

ARCITE.
You are not mad?

PALAMON.
Or I will make thadvantage of this hour
Mine own, and what to come shall threaten me
I fear less than my fortune. Know, weak cousin,
I love Emilia, and in that Ill bury
Thee, and all crosses else.

ARCITE.
Then, come what can come,
Thou shalt know, Palamon, I dare as well
Die, as discourse, or sleep. Only this fears me,
The law will have the honour of our ends.
Have at thy life!

PALAMON.
Look to thine own well, Arcite.

[_They fight. Horns within. They stand._]

Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Emilia, Pirithous and train.

THESEUS.
What ignorant and mad malicious traitors
Are you, that gainst the tenor of my laws
Are making battle, thus like knights appointed,
Without my leave, and officers of arms?
By Castor, both shall die.

PALAMON.
Hold thy word, Theseus.
We are certainly both traitors, both despisers
Of thee and of thy goodness. I am Palamon,
That cannot love thee, he that broke thy prison.
Think well what that deserves. And this is Arcite.
A bolder traitor never trod thy ground,
A falser neer seemed friend. This is the man
Was begged and banished; this is he contemns thee
And what thou darst do; and in this disguise,
Against thine own edict, follows thy sister,
That fortunate bright star, the fair Emilia,
Whose servantif there be a right in seeing
And first bequeathing of the soul tojustly
I am; and, which is more, dares think her his.
This treachery, like a most trusty lover,
I called him now to answer. If thou best
As thou art spoken, great and virtuous,
The true decider of all injuries,
Say Fight again, and thou shalt see me, Theseus,
Do such a justice thou thyself wilt envy.
Then take my life; Ill woo thee to t.

PIRITHOUS.
O heaven,
What more than man is this!

THESEUS.
I have sworn.

ARCITE.
We seek not
Thy breath of mercy, Theseus. Tis to me
A thing as soon to die as thee to say it,
And no more moved. Where this man calls me traitor,
Let me say thus much: if in love be treason,
In service of so excellent a beauty,
As I love most, and in that faith will perish,
As I have brought my life here to confirm it,
As I have served her truest, worthiest,
As I dare kill this cousin that denies it,
So let me be most traitor, and you please me.
For scorning thy edict, Duke, ask that lady
Why she is fair, and why her eyes command me
Stay here to love her; and if she say traitor,
I am a villain fit to lie unburied.

PALAMON.
Thou shalt have pity of us both, O Theseus,
If unto neither thou show mercy. Stop,
As thou art just, thy noble ear against us;
As thou art valiant, for thy cousins soul,
Whose twelve strong labours crown his memory,
Lets die together at one instant, Duke;
Only a little let him fall before me,
That I may tell my soul he shall not have her.

THESEUS.
I grant your wish, for, to say true, your cousin
Has ten times more offended, for I gave him
More mercy than you found, sir, your offences
Being no more than his. None here speak for em,
For, ere the sun set, both shall sleep for ever.

HIPPOLYTA.
Alas the pity! Now or never, sister,
Speak, not to be denied. That face of yours
Will bear the curses else of after ages
For these lost cousins.

EMILIA.
In my face, dear sister,
I find no anger to em, nor no ruin;
The misadventure of their own eyes kill em.
Yet that I will be woman and have pity,
My knees shall grow to th ground but Ill get mercy.

[_She kneels._]

Help me, dear sister; in a deed so virtuous
The powers of all women will be with us.
Most royal brother

HIPPOLYTA.
[_Kneels._] Sir, by our tie of marriage

EMILIA.
By your own spotless honour

HIPPOLYTA.
By that faith,
That fair hand, and that honest heart you gave me

EMILIA.
By that you would have pity in another,
By your own virtues infinite

HIPPOLYTA.
By valour,
By all the chaste nights I have ever pleased you

THESEUS.
These are strange conjurings.

PIRITHOUS.
Nay, then, Ill in too.

[_Kneels._]

By all our friendship, sir, by all our dangers,
By all you love most: wars and this sweet lady

EMILIA.
By that you would have trembled to deny
A blushing maid

HIPPOLYTA.
By your own eyes, by strength,
In which you swore I went beyond all women,
Almost all men, and yet I yielded, Theseus

PIRITHOUS.
To crown all this, by your most noble soul,
Which cannot want due mercy, I beg first.

HIPPOLYTA.
Next, hear my prayers.

EMILIA.
Last, let me entreat, sir.

PIRITHOUS.
For mercy.

HIPPOLYTA.
Mercy.

EMILIA.
Mercy on these princes.

THESEUS.
Ye make my faith reel. Say I felt
Compassion toem both, how would you place it?

[_Emilia, Hippolyta and Pirithous rise._]

EMILIA.
Upon their lives. But with their banishments.

THESEUS.
You are a right woman, sister: you have pity,
But want the understanding where to use it.
If you desire their lives, invent a way
Safer than banishment. Can these two live,
And have the agony of love about em,
And not kill one another? Every day
Theyd fight about you, hourly bring your honour
In public question with their swords. Be wise, then,
And here forget em; it concerns your credit
And my oath equally. I have said they die.
Better they fall by th law than one another.
Bow not my honour.

EMILIA.
O, my noble brother,
That oath was rashly made, and in your anger;
Your reason will not hold it; if such vows
Stand for express will, all the world must perish.
Besides, I have another oath gainst yours,
Of more authority, I am sure more love,
Not made in passion neither, but good heed.

THESEUS.
What is it, sister?

PIRITHOUS.
Urge it home, brave lady.

EMILIA.
That you would neer deny me anything
Fit for my modest suit and your free granting.
I tie you to your word now; if ye fail in t,
Think how you maim your honour
For now I am set a-begging, sir, I am deaf
To all but your compassionhow their lives
Might breed the ruin of my name. Opinion!
Shall anything that loves me perish for me?
That were a cruel wisdom. Do men prune
The straight young boughs that blush with thousand blossoms
Because they may be rotten? O, Duke Theseus,
The goodly mothers that have groaned for these,
And all the longing maids that ever loved,
If your vow stand, shall curse me and my beauty,
And in their funeral songs for these two cousins
Despise my cruelty, and cry woe worth me,
Till I am nothing but the scorn of women.
For heavens sake, save their lives, and banish em.

THESEUS.
On what conditions?

EMILIA.
Swear em never more
To make me their contention, or to know me,
To tread upon thy dukedom, and to be,
Wherever they shall travel, ever strangers
To one another.

PALAMON.
Ill be cut a-pieces
Before I take this oath! Forget I love her?
O, all ye gods, despise me then! Thy banishment
I not mislike, so we may fairly carry
Our swords and cause along; else never trifle,
But take our lives, Duke. I must love, and will
And for that love must and dare kill this cousin
On any piece the earth has.

THESEUS.
Will you, Arcite,
Take these conditions?

PALAMON.
Hes a villain, then.

PIRITHOUS.
These are men!

ARCITE.
No, never, Duke. Tis worse to me than begging
To take my life so basely. Though I think
I never shall enjoy her, yet Ill preserve
The honour of affection, and die for her,
Make death a devil.

THESEUS.
What may be done? For now I feel compassion.

PIRITHOUS.
Let it not fall again, sir.

THESEUS.
Say, Emilia,
If one of them were dead, as one must, are you
Content to take th other to your husband?
They cannot both enjoy you. They are princes
As goodly as your own eyes, and as noble
As ever fame yet spoke of. Look upon em,
And, if you can love, end this difference;
I give consent.Are you content too, princes?

BOTH.
With all our souls.

THESEUS.
He that she refuses
Must die, then.

BOTH.
Any death thou canst invent, Duke.

PALAMON.
If I fall from that mouth, I fall with favour,
And lovers yet unborn shall bless my ashes.

ARCITE.
If she refuse me, yet my grave will wed me,
And soldiers sing my epitaph.

THESEUS.
Make choice, then.

EMILIA.
I cannot, sir, they are both too excellent;
For me, a hair shall never fall of these men.

HIPPOLYTA.
What will become of em?

THESEUS.
Thus I ordain it
And, by mine honour, once again, it stands,
Or both shall die. You shall both to your country,
And each within this month, accompanied
With three fair knights, appear again in this place,
In which Ill plant a pyramid; and whether,
Before us that are here, can force his cousin
By fair and knightly strength to touch the pillar,
He shall enjoy her; th other lose his head,
And all his friends; nor shall he grudge to fall,
Nor think he dies with interest in this lady.
Will this content ye?

PALAMON.
Yes. Here, cousin Arcite,
I am friends again, till that hour.

[_He offers his hand._]

ARCITE.
I embrace ye.

THESEUS.
Are you content, sister?

EMILIA.
Yes, I must, sir,
Else both miscarry.

THESEUS.
Come, shake hands again, then;
And take heed, as you are gentlemen, this quarrel
Sleep till the hour prefixed, and hold your course.

PALAMON.
We dare not fail thee, Theseus.

[_They shake hands._]

THESEUS.
Come, Ill give ye
Now usage like to princes, and to friends.
When ye return, who wins, Ill settle here;
Who loses, yet Ill weep upon his bier.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. Athens. A room in the prison


Enter Jailer and his Friend.

JAILER.
Hear you no more? Was nothing said of me
Concerning the escape of Palamon?
Good sir, remember.

FIRST FRIEND.
Nothing that I heard,
For I came home before the business
Was fully ended. Yet I might perceive,
Ere I departed, a great likelihood
Of both their pardons; for Hippolyta
And fair-eyed Emily, upon their knees,
Begged with such handsome pity that the Duke
Methought stood staggering whether he should follow
His rash oath or the sweet compassion
Of those two ladies. And, to second them,
That truly noble prince, Pirithous,
Half his own heart, set in too, that I hope
All shall be well. Neither heard I one question
Of your name or his scape.

JAILER.
Pray heaven it hold so.

Enter Second Friend.

SECOND FRIEND.
Be of good comfort, man; I bring you news,
Good news.

JAILER.
They are welcome.

SECOND FRIEND.
Palamon has cleared you,
And got your pardon, and discovered how
And by whose means he escaped, which was your daughters,
Whose pardon is procured too; and the prisoner,
Not to be held ungrateful to her goodness,
Has given a sum of money to her marriage,
A large one, Ill assure you.

JAILER.
You are a good man
And ever bring good news.

FIRST FRIEND.
How was it ended?

SECOND FRIEND.
Why, as it should be; they that never begged
But they prevailed had their suits fairly granted;
The prisoners have their lives.

FIRST FRIEND.
I knew twould be so.

SECOND FRIEND.
But there be new conditions, which youll hear of
At better time.

JAILER.
I hope they are good.

SECOND FRIEND.
They are honourable;
How good theyll prove, I know not.

FIRST FRIEND.
Twill be known.

Enter Wooer.

WOOER.
Alas, sir, wheres your daughter?

JAILER.
Why do you ask?

WOOER.
O, sir, when did you see her?

SECOND FRIEND.
How he looks?

JAILER.
This morning.

WOOER.
Was she well? Was she in health, sir?
When did she sleep?

FIRST FRIEND.
These are strange questions.

JAILER.
I do not think she was very well, for now
You make me mind her, but this very day
I asked her questions, and she answered me
So far from what she was, so childishly,
So sillily, as if she were a fool,
An innocent, and I was very angry.
But what of her, sir?

WOOER.
Nothing but my pity.
But you must know it, and as good by me
As by another that less loves her.

JAILER.
Well, sir?

FIRST FRIEND.
Not right?

SECOND FRIEND.
Not well?

WOOER.
No, sir, not well:
Tis too true, she is mad.

FIRST FRIEND.
It cannot be.

WOOER.
Believe, youll find it so.

JAILER.
I half suspected
What you have told me. The gods comfort her!
Either this was her love to Palamon,
Or fear of my miscarrying on his scape,
Or both.

WOOER.
Tis likely.

JAILER.
But why all this haste, sir?

WOOER.
Ill tell you quickly. As I late was angling
In the great lake that lies behind the palace,
From the far shore, thick set with reeds and sedges,
As patiently I was attending sport,
I heard a voice, a shrill one; and, attentive,
I gave my ear, when I might well perceive
Twas one that sung, and by the smallness of it
A boy or woman. I then left my angle
To his own skill, came near, but yet perceived not
Who made the sound, the rushes and the reeds
Had so encompassed it. I laid me down
And listened to the words she sung, for then,
Through a small glade cut by the fishermen,
I saw it was your daughter.

JAILER.
Pray, go on, sir.

WOOER.
She sung much, but no sense; only I heard her
Repeat this often: Palamon is gone,
Is gone to th wood to gather mulberries;
Ill find him out tomorrow.

FIRST FRIEND.
Pretty soul!

WOOER.
His shackles will betray him; hell be taken,
And what shall I do then? Ill bring a bevy,
A hundred black-eyed maids that love as I do,
With chaplets on their heads of daffadillies,
With cherry lips and cheeks of damask roses,
And all well dance an antic fore the Duke,
And beg his pardon. Then she talked of you, sir;
That you must lose your head tomorrow morning,
And she must gather flowers to bury you,
And see the house made handsome. Then she sung
Nothing but Willow, willow, willow, and between
Ever was Palamon, fair Palamon,
And Palamon was a tall young man. The place
Was knee-deep where she sat; her careless tresses,
A wreath of bulrush rounded; about her stuck
Thousand fresh water-flowers of several colours,
That methought she appeared like the fair nymph
That feeds the lake with waters, or as Iris
Newly dropped down from heaven. Rings she made
Of rushes that grew by, and to em spoke
The prettiest posies: Thus our true loves tied,
This you may loose, not me, and many a one;
And then she wept, and sung again, and sighed,
And with the same breath smiled and kissed her hand.

SECOND FRIEND.
Alas, what pity it is!

WOOER.
I made in to her.
She saw me, and straight sought the flood. I saved her
And set her safe to land, when presently
She slipped away, and to the city made
With such a cry and swiftness that, believe me,
She left me far behind her. Three or four
I saw from far off cross herone of em
I knew to be your brotherwhere she stayed
And fell, scarce to be got away. I left them with her
And hither came to tell you.

Enter Jailers Brother, Jailers Daughter and others.

Here they are.

DAUGHTER.
[_Sings_.]

    _May you never more enjoy the light, &c._

Is not this a fine song?

BROTHER.
O, a very fine one.

DAUGHTER.
I can sing twenty more.

BROTHER.
I think you can.

DAUGHTER.
Yes, truly can I. I can sing The Broom
and Bonny Robin. Are not you a tailor?

BROTHER.
Yes.

DAUGHTER.
Wheres my wedding gown?

BROTHER.
Ill bring it tomorrow.

DAUGHTER.
Do, very rarely, I must be abroad else
To call the maids and pay the minstrels,
For I must lose my maidenhead by cocklight.
Twill never thrive else.
[_Sings_.] _O fair, O sweet, &c._

BROTHER.
[_To Jailer._] You must een take it patiently.

JAILER.
Tis true.

DAUGHTER.
Good evn, good men; pray, did you ever hear
Of one young Palamon?

JAILER.
Yes, wench, we know him.

DAUGHTER.
Ist not a fine young gentleman?

JAILER.
Tis, love.

BROTHER.
By no means cross her; she is then distempered
Far worse than now she shows.

FIRST FRIEND.
Yes, hes a fine man.

DAUGHTER.
O, is he so? You have a sister?

FIRST FRIEND.
Yes.

DAUGHTER.
But she shall never have him, tell her so,
For a trick that I know; youd best look to her,
For if she see him once, shes gone, shes done,
And undone in an hour. All the young maids
Of our town are in love with him, but I laugh at em
And let em all alone. Is t not a wise course?

FIRST FRIEND.
Yes.

DAUGHTER.
There is at least two hundred now with child by him
There must be four; yet I keep close for all this,
Close as a cockle; and all these must be boys
He has the trick on t; and at ten years old
They must be all gelt for musicians
And sing the wars of Theseus.

SECOND FRIEND.
This is strange.

DAUGHTER.
As ever you heard, but say nothing.

FIRST FRIEND.
No.

DAUGHTER.
They come from all parts of the dukedom to him.
Ill warrant ye, he had not so few last night
As twenty to dispatch. Hell tickle t up
In two hours, if his hand be in.

JAILER.
Shes lost
Past all cure.

BROTHER.
Heaven forbid, man!

DAUGHTER.
Come hither, you are a wise man.

FIRST FRIEND.
[_Aside._] Does she know him?

SECOND FRIEND.
[_Aside._] No, would she did.

DAUGHTER.
You are master of a ship?

JAILER.
Yes.

DAUGHTER.
Wheres your compass?

JAILER.
Here.

DAUGHTER.
Set it to th north.
And now direct your course to th wood, where Palamon
Lies longing for me. For the tackling,
Let me alone. Come, weigh, my hearts, cheerly.

ALL.
Owgh, owgh, owgh! Tis up, the winds fair!
Top the bowline; out with the mainsail;
Wheres your whistle, master?

BROTHER.
Lets get her in.

JAILER.
Up to the top, boy.

BROTHER.
Wheres the pilot?

FIRST FRIEND.
Here.

DAUGHTER.
What kennst thou?

SECOND FRIEND.
A fair wood.

DAUGHTER.
Bear for it, master. Tack about!
[_Sings_.]
    _When Cinthia with her borrowed light, &c._

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A Room in the Palace

Enter Emilia alone, with two pictures.

EMILIA.
Yet I may bind those wounds up, that must open
And bleed to death for my sake else. Ill choose,
And end their strife. Two such young handsome men
Shall never fall for me; their weeping mothers,
Following the dead cold ashes of their sons,
Shall never curse my cruelty.

[_Looks at one of the pictures._]

Good heaven,
What a sweet face has Arcite! If wise Nature,
With all her best endowments, all those beauties
She sows into the births of noble bodies,
Were here a mortal woman, and had in her
The coy denials of young maids, yet doubtless
She would run mad for this man. What an eye,
Of what a fiery sparkle and quick sweetness,
Has this young prince! Here Love himself sits smiling;
Just such another wanton Ganymede
Set Jove afire with, and enforced the god
Snatch up the goodly boy and set him by him,
A shining constellation. What a brow,
Of what a spacious majesty, he carries,
Arched like the great-eyed Junos, but far sweeter,
Smoother than Pelops shoulder! Fame and Honour,
Methinks, from hence, as from a promontory
Pointed in heaven, should clap their wings and sing
To all the under-world the loves and fights
Of gods and such men near em.

[_Looks at the other picture._]

Palamon
Is but his foil; to him a mere dull shadow;
Hes swart and meagre, of an eye as heavy
As if he had lost his mother; a still temper,
No stirring in him, no alacrity;
Of all this sprightly sharpness, not a smile.
Yet these that we count errors may become him;
Narcissus was a sad boy but a heavenly.
O, who can find the bent of womans fancy?
I am a fool; my reason is lost in me;
I have no choice, and I have lied so lewdly
That women ought to beat me. On my knees
I ask thy pardon, Palamon, thou art alone
And only beautiful, and these the eyes,
These the bright lamps of beauty, that command
And threaten love, and what young maid dare cross em?
What a bold gravity, and yet inviting,
Has this brown manly face! O Love, this only
From this hour is complexion. Lie there, Arcite.

[_She puts aside his picture._]

Thou art a changeling to him, a mere gypsy,
And this the noble body. I am sotted,
Utterly lost. My virgins faith has fled me.
For if my brother but even now had asked me
Whether I loved, I had run mad for Arcite;
Now, if my sister, more for Palamon.
Stand both together. Now, come ask me, brother.
Alas, I know not! Ask me now, sweet sister.
I may go look! What a mere child is Fancy,
That, having two fair gauds of equal sweetness,
Cannot distinguish, but must cry for both.

Enter a Gentleman.

EMILIA.
How now, sir?

GENTLEMAN.
From the noble Duke your brother,
Madam, I bring you news. The knights are come.

EMILIA.
To end the quarrel?

GENTLEMAN.
Yes.

EMILIA.
Would I might end first!
What sins have I committed, chaste Diana,
That my unspotted youth must now be soiled
With blood of princes, and my chastity
Be made the altar where the lives of lovers
Two greater and two better never yet
Made mothers joymust be the sacrifice
To my unhappy beauty?

Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Pirithous and Attendants.

THESEUS.
Bring em in
Quickly, by any means; I long to see em.
Your two contending lovers are returned,
And with them their fair knights. Now, my fair sister,
You must love one of them.

EMILIA.
I had rather both,
So neither for my sake should fall untimely.

THESEUS.
Who saw em?

PIRITHOUS.
I a while.

GENTLEMAN.
And I.

Enter Messenger.

THESEUS.
From whence come you, sir?

MESSENGER.
From the knights.

THESEUS.
Pray, speak,
You that have seen them, what they are.

MESSENGER.
I will, sir,
And truly what I think. Six braver spirits
Than these they have brought, if we judge by the outside,
I never saw nor read of. He that stands
In the first place with Arcite, by his seeming
Should be a stout man, by his face a prince,
His very looks so say him; his complexion
Nearer a brown than black, stern and yet noble,
Which shows him hardy, fearless, proud of dangers;
The circles of his eyes show fire within him,
And as a heated lion so he looks.
His hair hangs long behind him, black and shining
Like ravens wings; his shoulders broad and strong;
Armed long and round; and on his thigh a sword
Hung by a curious baldric, when he frowns
To seal his will with. Better, o my conscience,
Was never soldiers friend.

THESEUS.
Thou hast well described him.

PIRITHOUS.
Yet a great deal short,
Methinks, of him thats first with Palamon.

THESEUS.
Pray, speak him, friend.

PIRITHOUS.
I guess he is a prince too,
And, if it may be, greater; for his show
Has all the ornament of honour in t:
Hes somewhat bigger than the knight he spoke of,
But of a face far sweeter; his complexion
Is, as a ripe grape, ruddy. He has felt
Without doubt what he fights for, and so apter
To make this cause his own. In s face appears
All the fair hopes of what he undertakes
And when hes angry, then a settled valour,
Not tainted with extremes, runs through his body
And guides his arm to brave things. Fear he cannot;
He shows no such soft temper. His heads yellow,
Hard-haired and curled, thick-twined like ivy tods,
Not to undo with thunder. In his face
The livery of the warlike maid appears,
Pure red and white, for yet no beard has blessed him;
And in his rolling eyes sits Victory,
As if she ever meant to crown his valour.
His nose stands high, a character of honour;
His red lips, after fights, are fit for ladies.

EMILIA.
Must these men die too?

PIRITHOUS.
When he speaks, his tongue
Sounds like a trumpet. All his lineaments
Are as a man would wish em, strong and clean.
He wears a well-steeled axe, the staff of gold;
His age some five-and-twenty.

MESSENGER.
Theres another,
A little man, but of a tough soul, seeming
As great as any; fairer promises
In such a body yet I never looked on.

PIRITHOUS.
O, he thats freckle-faced?

MESSENGER.
The same, my lord;
Are they not sweet ones?

PIRITHOUS.
Yes, they are well.

MESSENGER.
Methinks,
Being so few and well disposed, they show
Great and fine art in nature. Hes white-haired,
Not wanton white, but such a manly colour
Next to an auburn; tough and nimble-set,
Which shows an active soul. His arms are brawny,
Lined with strong sinews. To the shoulder-piece
Gently they swell, like women new-conceived,
Which speaks him prone to labour, never fainting
Under the weight of arms; stout-hearted still,
But when he stirs, a tiger. Hes grey-eyed,
Which yields compassion where he conquers; sharp
To spy advantages, and where he finds em,
Hes swift to make em his. He does no wrongs,
Nor takes none. Hes round-faced, and when he smiles
He shows a lover; when he frowns, a soldier.
About his head he wears the winners oak,
And in it stuck the favour of his lady.
His age some six-and-thirty. In his hand
He bears a charging-staff embossed with silver.

THESEUS.
Are they all thus?

PIRITHOUS.
They are all the sons of honour.

THESEUS.
Now, as I have a soul, I long to seeem.
Lady, you shall see men fight now.

HIPPOLYTA.
I wish it,
But not the cause, my lord. They would show
Bravely about the titles of two kingdoms.
Tis pity love should be so tyrannous.
O, my soft-hearted sister, what think you?
Weep not till they weep blood. Wench, it must be.

THESEUS.
You have steeled em with your beauty.
Honoured friend,
To you I give the field; pray order it
Fitting the persons that must use it.

PIRITHOUS.
Yes, sir.

THESEUS.
Come, Ill go visit em. I cannot stay,
Their fame has fired me so; till they appear.
Good friend, be royal.

PIRITHOUS.
There shall want no bravery.

[_Exeunt all but Emilia._]

EMILIA.
Poor wench, go weep, for whosoever wins,
Loses a noble cousin for thy sins.

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. A room in the prison

Enter Jailer, Wooer and Doctor.

DOCTOR.
Her distraction is more at some time of the moon, than at other some,
is it not?

JAILER.
She is continually in a harmless distemper, sleeps little, altogether
without appetite, save often drinking, dreaming of another world, and a
better; and what broken piece of matter soeer shes about, the name
Palamon lards it, that she farces every business withal, fits it to
every question.

Enter Jailers Daughter.

Look where she comes; you shall perceive her behaviour.

DAUGHTER.
I have forgot it quite. The burden on t was Down-a, down-a, and
penned by no worse man than Geraldo, Emilias schoolmaster. Hes as
fantastical, too, as ever he may go upons legs, for in the next world
will Dido see Palamon, and then will she be out of love with neas.

DOCTOR.
What stuffs here? Poor soul!

JAILER.
Even thus all day long.

DAUGHTER.
Now for this charm that I told you of: you must bring a piece of silver
on the tip of your tongue, or no ferry. Then if it be your chance to
come where the blessed spirits are, theres a sight now! We maids that
have our livers perished, cracked to pieces with love, we shall come
there, and do nothing all day long but pick flowers with Proserpine.
Then will I make Palamon a nosegay; then let him mark methen.

DOCTOR.
How prettily shes amiss! Note her a little further.

DAUGHTER.
Faith, Ill tell you, sometime we go to barley-break, we of the
blessed. Alas, tis a sore life they have i th other placesuch
burning, frying, boiling, hissing, howling, chattering, cursingO, they
have shrewd measure; take heed! If one be mad, or hang or drown
themselves, thither they go; Jupiter bless us! And there shall we be
put in a cauldron of lead and usurers grease, amongst a whole million
of cutpurses, and there boil like a gammon of bacon that will never be
enough.

DOCTOR.
How her brain coins!

DAUGHTER.
Lords and courtiers that have got maids with child, they are in this
place. They shall stand in fire up to the navel and in ice up to the
heart, and there th offending part burns and the deceiving part
freezes. In troth, a very grievous punishment, as one would think, for
such a trifle. Believe me, one would marry a leprous witch to be rid on
t, Ill assure you.

DOCTOR.
How she continues this fancy! Tis not an engraffed madness, but a most
thick, and profound melancholy.

DAUGHTER.
To hear there a proud lady and a proud city wife howl together! I were
a beast an Id call it good sport. One cries O this smoke! th other,
This fire!; one cries, O, that ever I did it behind the arras! and
then howls; th other curses a suing fellow and her garden house.

[_Sings._]
    _I will be true, my stars, my fate, &c._

[_Exit Jailers Daughter._]

JAILER.
What think you of her, sir?

DOCTOR.
I think she has a perturbed mind, which I cannot minister to.

JAILER.
Alas, what then?

DOCTOR.
Understand you she ever affected any man ere she beheld Palamon?

JAILER.
I was once, sir, in great hope she had fixed her liking on this
gentleman, my friend.

WOOER.
I did think so too, and would account I had a great pennorth ont, to
give half my state, that both she and I at this present stood
unfeignedly on the same terms.

DOCTOR.
That intemperate surfeit of her eye hath distempered the other senses.
They may return and settle again to execute their preordained
faculties, but they are now in a most extravagant vagary. This you must
do: confine her to a place where the light may rather seem to steal in
than be permitted. Take upon you, young sir, her friend, the name of
Palamon; say you come to eat with her, and to commune of love. This
will catch her attention, for this her mind beats upon; other objects
that are inserted tween her mind and eye become the pranks and
friskins of her madness. Sing to her such green songs of love as she
says Palamon hath sung in prison. Come to her stuck in as sweet flowers
as the season is mistress of, and thereto make an addition of some
other compounded odours which are grateful to the sense. All this shall
become Palamon, for Palamon can sing, and Palamon is sweet and every
good thing. Desire to eat with her, carve her, drink to her, and still
among intermingle your petition of grace and acceptance into her
favour. Learn what maids have been her companions and play-feres, and
let them repair to her with Palamon in their mouths, and appear with
tokens, as if they suggested for him. It is a falsehood she is in,
which is with falsehoods to be combated. This may bring her to eat, to
sleep, and reduce whats now out of square in her into their former law
and regiment. I have seen it approved, how many times I know not, but
to make the number more I have great hope in this. I will, between the
passages of this project, come in with my appliance. Let us put it in
execution and hasten the success, which, doubt not, will bring forth
comfort.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Athens. Before the Temples of Mars, Venus, and Diana


Flourish. Enter Theseus, Pirithous, Hippolyta and Attendants.

THESEUS.
Now let em enter and before the gods
Tender their holy prayers. Let the temples
Burn bright with sacred fires, and the altars
In hallowed clouds commend their swelling incense
To those above us. Let no due be wanting.
They have a noble work in hand, will honour
The very powers that love em.

PIRITHOUS.
Sir, they enter.

Enter Palamon and Arcite and their Knights.

THESEUS.
You valiant and strong-hearted enemies,
You royal german foes, that this day come
To blow that nearness out that flames between ye,
Lay by your anger for an hour and, dove-like,
Before the holy altars of your helpers,
The all-feared gods, bow down your stubborn bodies.
Your ire is more than mortal; so your help be;
And, as the gods regard ye, fight with justice.
Ill leave you to your prayers, and betwixt ye
I part my wishes.

PIRITHOUS.
Honour crown the worthiest.

[_Exeunt Theseus and his Train._]

PALAMON.
The glass is running now that cannot finish
Till one of us expire. Think you but thus,
That were there aught in me which strove to show
Mine enemy in this business, were t one eye
Against another, arm oppressed by arm,
I would destroy th offender, coz, I would
Though parcel of myself. Then from this gather
How I should tender you.

ARCITE.
I am in labour
To push your name, your ancient love, our kindred
Out of my memory, and i th selfsame place
To seat something I would confound. So hoist we
The sails that must these vessels port even where
The heavenly limiter pleases.

PALAMON.
You speak well.
Before I turn, let me embrace thee, cousin.
This I shall never do again.

ARCITE.
One farewell.

PALAMON.
Why, let it be so. Farewell, coz.

ARCITE.
Farewell, sir.

[_Exeunt Palamon and his Knights._]

Knights, kinsmen, lovers, yea, my sacrifices,
True worshippers of Mars, whose spirit in you
Expels the seeds of fear and th apprehension
Which still is father of it, go with me
Before the god of our profession. There
Require of him the hearts of lions and
The breath of tigers, yea, the fierceness too,
Yea, the speed alsoto go on, I mean;
Else wish we to be snails. You know my prize
Must be dragged out of blood; force and great feat
Must put my garland on, where she sticks,
The queen of flowers. Our intercession, then,
Must be to him that makes the camp a cistern
Brimmed with the blood of men. Give me your aid,
And bend your spirits towards him.

[_They advance to the altar of Mars, fall on their faces before it, and
then kneel._]

Thou mighty one, that with thy power hast turned
Green Neptune into purple; whose approach
Comets prewarn, whose havoc in vast field
Unearthed skulls proclaim; whose breath blows down
The teeming Ceres foison, who dost pluck
With hand armipotent from forth blue clouds
The masoned turrets, that both makst and breakst
The stony girths of cities; me thy pupil,
Youngest follower of thy drum, instruct this day
With military skill, that to thy laud
I may advance my streamer, and by thee
Be styled the lord o th day. Give me, great Mars,
Some token of thy pleasure.

[_Here they fall on their faces as formerly, and there is heard
clanging of armour, with a short thunder, as the burst of a battle,
whereupon they all rise and bow to the altar._]

O, great corrector of enormous times,
Shaker of oer-rank states, thou grand decider
Of dusty and old titles, that healst with blood
The earth when it is sick, and curst the world
O th pleurisy of people; I do take
Thy signs auspiciously, and in thy name
To my design march boldly.Let us go.

[_Exeunt._]

Enter Palamon and his Knights, with the former observance.

PALAMON.
Our stars must glister with new fire, or be
Today extinct. Our argument is love,
Which, if the goddess of it grant, she gives
Victory too. Then blend your spirits with mine,
You whose free nobleness do make my cause
Your personal hazard. To the goddess Venus
Commend we our proceeding, and implore
Her power unto our party.

[_Here they kneel as formerly._]

Hail, sovereign queen of secrets, who hast power
To call the fiercest tyrant from his rage
And weep unto a girl; that hast the might
Even with an eye-glance to choke Marss drum
And turn th alarm to whispers; that canst make
A cripple flourish with his crutch, and cure him
Before Apollo; that mayst force the king
To be his subjects vassal, and induce
Stale gravity to dance. The polled bachelor,
Whose youth, like wanton boys through bonfires,
Have skipped thy flame, at seventy thou canst catch,
And make him, to the scorn of his hoarse throat,
Abuse young lays of love. What godlike power
Hast thou not power upon? To Phbus thou
Addst flames hotter than his; the heavenly fires
Did scorch his mortal son, thine him. The huntress,
All moist and cold, some say, began to throw
Her bow away and sigh. Take to thy grace
Me, thy vowed soldier, who do bear thy yoke
As twere a wreath of roses, yet is heavier
Than lead itself, stings more than nettles.
I have never been foul-mouthed against thy law,
Neer revealed secret, for I knew nonewould not,
Had I kenned all that were. I never practised
Upon mans wife, nor would the libels read
Of liberal wits. I never at great feasts
Sought to betray a beauty, but have blushed
At simpering sirs that did. I have been harsh
To large confessors, and have hotly asked them
If they had mothersI had one, a woman,
And women twere they wronged. I knew a man
Of eighty winters, this I told them, who
A lass of fourteen brided; twas thy power
To put life into dust. The aged cramp
Had screwed his square foot round;
The gout had knit his fingers into knots,
Torturing convulsions from his globy eyes
Had almost drawn their spheres, that what was life
In him seemed torture. This anatomy
Had by his young fair fere a boy, and I
Believed it was his, for she swore it was,
And who would not believe her? Brief, I am
To those that prate and have done, no companion;
To those that boast and have not, a defier;
To those that would and cannot, a rejoicer.
Yea, him I do not love that tells close offices
The foulest way, nor names concealments in
The boldest language. Such a one I am,
And vow that lover never yet made sigh
Truer than I. O, then, most soft sweet goddess,
Give me the victory of this question, which
Is true loves merit, and bless me with a sign
Of thy great pleasure.

[_Here music is heard; doves are seen to flutter. They fall again upon
their faces, then on their knees._]

O thou that from eleven to ninety reignst
In mortal bosoms, whose chase is this world
And we in herds thy game, I give thee thanks
For this fair token, which being laid unto
Mine innocent true heart, arms in assurance
My body to this business.Let us rise
And bow before the goddess.

[_They rise and bow._]

Time comes on.

[_Exeunt._]

Still music of recorders. Enter Emilia in white, her hair about her
shoulders, wearing a wheaten wreath. One in white holding up her train,
her hair stuck with flowers. One before her carrying a silver hind, in
which is conveyed incense and sweet odours, which being set upon the
altar of  Diana, her maids standing aloof, she sets fire to it; then
they curtsy and kneel.

EMILIA.
O sacred, shadowy, cold, and constant queen,
Abandoner of revels, mute contemplative,
Sweet, solitary, white as chaste, and pure
As wind-fanned snow, who to thy female knights
Allowst no more blood than will make a blush,
Which is their orders robe, I here, thy priest,
Am humbled fore thine altar. O, vouchsafe
With that thy rare green eye, which never yet
Beheld thing maculate, look on thy virgin;
And, sacred silver mistress, lend thine ear,
Which neer heard scurrile term, into whose port
Neer entered wanton sound, to my petition,
Seasoned with holy fear. This is my last
Of vestal office. I am bride-habited
But maiden-hearted. A husband I have pointed,
But do not know him. Out of two I should
Choose one, and pray for his success, but I
Am guiltless of election. Of mine eyes,
Were I to lose one, they are equal precious;
I could doom neither; that which perished should
Go to t unsentenced. Therefore, most modest queen,
He of the two pretenders that best loves me
And has the truest title in t, let him
Take off my wheaten garland, or else grant
The file and quality I hold I may
Continue in thy band.

[_Here the hind vanishes under the altar, and in the place ascends a
rose tree, having one rose upon it._]

 See what our general of ebbs and flows
Out from the bowels of her holy altar
With sacred act advances: but one rose!
If well inspired, this battle shall confound
Both these brave knights, and I, a virgin flower,
Must grow alone, unplucked.

[_Here is heard a sudden twang of instruments, and the rose falls from
the tree._]

The flower is falln, the tree descends. O mistress,
Thou here dischargest me. I shall be gathered;
I think so, but I know not thine own will.
Unclasp thy mystery!I hope shes pleased;
Her signs were gracious.

[_They curtsy and exeunt._]

SCENE II. Athens. A Room in the Prison

Enter Doctor, Jailer and Wooer in the habit of Palamon.

DOCTOR.
Has this advice I told you, done any good upon her?

WOOER.
O, very much. The maids that kept her company
Have half persuaded her that I am Palamon;
Within this half-hour she came smiling to me,
And asked me what I would eat, and when I would kiss her.
I told her Presently, and kissed her twice.

DOCTOR.
Twas well done. Twenty times had been far better,
For there the cure lies mainly.

WOOER.
Then she told me
She would watch with me tonight, for well she knew
What hour my fit would take me.

DOCTOR.
Let her do so,
And when your fit comes, fit her home, and presently.

WOOER.
She would have me sing.

DOCTOR.
You did so?

WOOER.
No.

DOCTOR.
Twas very ill done, then;
You should observe her every way.

WOOER.
Alas,
I have no voice, sir, to confirm her that way.

DOCTOR.
Thats all one, if ye make a noise.
If she entreat again, do anything.
Lie with her, if she ask you.

JAILER.
Hoa, there, doctor!

DOCTOR.
Yes, in the way of cure.

JAILER.
But first, by your leave,
I th way of honesty.

DOCTOR.
Thats but a niceness,
Neer cast your child away for honesty.
Cure her first this way; then if she will be honest,
She has the path before her.

JAILER.
Thank ye, Doctor.

DOCTOR.
Pray, bring her in,
And lets see how she is.

JAILER.
I will, and tell her
Her Palamon stays for her. But, Doctor,
Methinks you are i th wrong still.

[_Exit Jailer._]

DOCTOR.
Go, go;
You fathers are fine fools. Her honesty?
An we should give her physic till we find that!

WOOER.
Why, do you think she is not honest, sir?

DOCTOR.
How old is she?

WOOER.
Shes eighteen.

DOCTOR.
She may be,
But thats all one; tis nothing to our purpose.
Whateer her father says, if you perceive
Her mood inclining that way that I spoke of,
_Videlicet_, the way of fleshyou have me?

WOOER.
Yes, very well, sir.

DOCTOR.
Please her appetite,
And do it home; it cures her, _ipso facto_,
The melancholy humour that infects her.

WOOER.
I am of your mind, Doctor.

Enter Jailer, Jailers Daughter and Maid.

DOCTOR.
Youll find it so. She comes, pray, humour her.

JAILER.
Come, your love Palamon stays for you, child,
And has done this long hour, to visit you.

DAUGHTER.
I thank him for his gentle patience;
Hes a kind gentleman, and I am much bound to him.
Did you neer see the horse he gave me?

JAILER.
Yes.

DAUGHTER.
How do you like him?

JAILER.
Hes a very fair one.

DAUGHTER.
You never saw him dance?

JAILER.
No.

DAUGHTER.
I have often.
He dances very finely, very comely,
And for a jig, come cut and long tail to him,
He turns ye like a top.

JAILER.
Thats fine, indeed.

DAUGHTER.
Hell dance the morris twenty mile an hour,
And that will founder the best hobby-horse
If I have any skill in all the parish,
And gallops to the tune of Light o love.
What think you of this horse?

JAILER.
Having these virtues,
I think he might be brought to play at tennis.

DAUGHTER.
Alas, thats nothing.

JAILER.
Can he write and read too?

DAUGHTER.
A very fair hand, and casts himself th accounts
Of all his hay and provender. That hostler
Must rise betime that cozens him. You know
The chestnut mare the Duke has?

JAILER.
Very well.

DAUGHTER.
She is horribly in love with him, poor beast;
But he is like his master, coy and scornful.

JAILER.
What dowry has she?

DAUGHTER.
Some two hundred bottles,
And twenty strike of oates; but hell neer have her.
He lisps ins neighing, able to entice
A millers mare. Hell be the death of her.

DOCTOR.
What stuff she utters!

JAILER.
Make curtsy; here your love comes.

Enter Wooer and Doctor come forward.

WOOER.
Pretty soul,
How do ye? Thats a fine maid; theres a curtsy!

DAUGHTER.
Yours to command i th way of honesty.
How far ist now to th end o th world, my masters?

DOCTOR.
Why, a days journey, wench.

DAUGHTER.
Will you go with me?

WOOER.
What shall we do there, wench?

DAUGHTER.
Why, play at stool-ball;
What is there else to do?

WOOER.
I am content,
If we shall keep our wedding there.

DAUGHTER.
Tis true,
For there, I will assure you, we shall find
Some blind priest for the purpose, that will venture
To marry us, for here they are nice and foolish.
Besides, my father must be hanged tomorrow,
And that would be a blot i th business.
Are not you Palamon?

WOOER.
Do not you know me?

DAUGHTER.
Yes, but you care not for me. I have nothing
But this poor petticoat, and two coarse smocks.

WOOER.
Thats all one; I will have you.

DAUGHTER.
Will you surely?

WOOER.
[_Taking her hand._] Yes, by this fair hand, will I.

DAUGHTER.
Well to bed, then.

WOOER.
Een when you will.

[_Kisses her._]

DAUGHTER.
[_Rubs off the kiss._] O sir, you would fain be nibbling.

WOOER.
Why do you rub my kiss off?

DAUGHTER.
Tis a sweet one,
And will perfume me finely against the wedding.
Is not this your cousin Arcite?

[_She indicates the Doctor._]

DOCTOR.
Yes, sweetheart,
And I am glad my cousin Palamon
Has made so fair a choice.

DAUGHTER.
Do you think hell have me?

DOCTOR.
Yes, without doubt.

DAUGHTER.
Do you think so too?

JAILER.
Yes.

DAUGHTER.
We shall have many children. [_To Doctor._] Lord, how youre grown!
My Palamon, I hope, will grow too, finely,
Now hes at liberty. Alas, poor chicken,
He was kept down with hard meat and ill lodging,
But Ill kiss him up again.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
What do you here? Youll lose the noblest sight
That eer was seen.

JAILER.
Are they i th field?

MESSENGER.
They are.
You bear a charge there too.

JAILER.
Ill away straight.
I must een leave you here.

DOCTOR.
Nay, well go with you;
I will not lose the sight.

JAILER.
How did you like her?

DOCTOR.
Ill warrant you, within these three or four days
Ill make her right again. You must not from her,
But still preserve her in this way.

WOOER.
I will.

DOCTOR.
Lets get her in.

WOOER.
Come, sweet, well go to dinner;
And then well play at cards.

DAUGHTER.
And shall we kiss too?

WOOER.
A hundred times.

DAUGHTER.
And twenty.

WOOER.
Ay, and twenty.

DAUGHTER.
And then well sleep together.

DOCTOR.
Take her offer.

WOOER.
Yes, marry, will we.

DAUGHTER.
But you shall not hurt me.

WOOER.
I will not, sweet.

DAUGHTER.
If you do, love, Ill cry.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A part of the Forest near Athens, and near the Place
appointed for the Combat

Flourish. Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Emilia, Pirithous and some
Attendants.

EMILIA.
Ill no step further.

PIRITHOUS.
Will you lose this sight?

EMILIA.
I had rather see a wren hawk at a fly
Than this decision. Every blow that falls
Threats a brave life; each stroke laments
The place whereon it falls, and sounds more like
A bell than blade. I will stay here.
It is enough my hearing shall be punished
With what shall happen, gainst the which there is
No deafing, but to hear; not taint mine eye
With dread sights it may shun.

PIRITHOUS.
Sir, my good lord,
Your sister will no further.

THESEUS.
O, she must.
She shall see deeds of honour in their kind,
Which sometime show well, penciled. Nature now
Shall make and act the story, the belief
Both sealed with eye and ear. You must be present;
You are the victors meed, the price and garland
To crown the questions title.

EMILIA.
Pardon me;
If I were there, Id wink.

THESEUS.
You must be there;
This trial is as twere i th night, and you
The only star to shine.

EMILIA.
I am extinct.
There is but envy in that light which shows
The one the other. Darkness, which ever was
The dam of horror, who does stand accursed
Of many mortal millions, may even now,
By casting her black mantle over both,
That neither could find other, get herself
Some part of a good name, and many a murder
Set off whereto shes guilty.

HIPPOLYTA.
You must go.

EMILIA.
In faith, I will not.

THESEUS.
Why, the knights must kindle
Their valour at your eye. Know, of this war
You are the treasure, and must needs be by
To give the service pay.

EMILIA.
Sir, pardon me;
The title of a kingdom may be tried
Out of itself.

THESEUS.
Well, well, then, at your pleasure.
Those that remain with you could wish their office
To any of their enemies.

HIPPOLYTA.
Farewell, sister.
I am like to know your husband fore yourself
By some small start of time. He whom the gods
Do of the two know best, I pray them he
Be made your lot.

[_Exeunt all but Emilia._]

EMILIA.
Arcite is gently visaged, yet his eye
Is like an engine bent, or a sharp weapon
In a soft sheath; mercy and manly courage
Are bedfellows in his visage. Palamon
Has a most menacing aspect; his brow
Is graved, and seems to bury what it frowns on;
Yet sometimes tis not so, but alters to
The quality of his thoughts. Long time his eye
Will dwell upon his object. Melancholy
Becomes him nobly; so does Arcites mirth;
But Palamons sadness is a kind of mirth,
So mingled as if mirth did make him sad
And sadness merry. Those darker humours that
Stick misbecomingly on others, on them
Live in fair dwelling.

[_Cornets. Trumpets sound as to a charge._]

Hark how yon spurs to spirit do incite
The princes to their proof! Arcite may win me
And yet may Palamon wound Arcite to
The spoiling of his figure. O, what pity
Enough for such a chance? If I were by,
I might do hurt, for they would glance their eyes
Towards my seat, and in that motion might
Omit a ward or forfeit an offence
Which craved that very time. It is much better
I am not there.

[_Cornets. A great cry and noise within crying  Palamon!_]

Oh better never born
Than minister to such harm.

Enter Servant.

What is the chance?

SERVANT.
The crys  Palamon.

EMILIA.
Then he has won. Twas ever likely.
He looked all grace and success, and he is
Doubtless the primst of men. I prithee run
And tell me how it goes.

[_Shout and cornets, crying  Palamon!_]

SERVANT.
Still Palamon.

EMILIA.
Run and enquire.

[_Exit Servant._]

Poor servant, thou hast lost.
Upon my right side still I wore thy picture,
Palamons on the left. Why so, I know not.
I had no end in t else; chance would have it so.
On the sinister side the heart lies; Palamon
Had the best-boding chance.

[_Another cry and shout within, and cornets._]

This burst of clamour
Is sure th end o th combat.

Enter Servant.

SERVANT.
They said that Palamon had Arcites body
Within an inch o th pyramid, that the cry
Was general  Palamon. But anon,
Th assistants made a brave redemption, and
The two bold titlers at this instant are
Hand to hand at it.

EMILIA.
Were they metamorphosed
Both into oneO, why? There were no woman
Worth so composed a man! Their single share,
Their nobleness peculiar to them, gives
The prejudice of disparity, values shortness,
To any lady breathing.

[_Cornets. Cry within, Arcite, Arcite._]

More exulting?
Palamon still?

SERVANT.
Nay, now the sound is Arcite.

EMILIA.
I prithee, lay attention to the cry;
Set both thine ears to th business.

[_Cornets. A great shout and cry Arcite, victory!_]


SERVANT.
The cry is
Arcite, and Victory! Hark, Arcite, victory!
The combats consummation is proclaimed
By the wind instruments.

EMILIA.
Half-sights saw
That Arcite was no babe. Gods lid, his richness
And costliness of spirit looked through him; it could
No more be hid in him than fire in flax,
Than humble banks can go to law with waters
That drift-winds force to raging. I did think
Good Palamon would miscarry, yet I knew not
Why I did think so. Our reasons are not prophets
When oft our fancies are. They are coming off.
Alas, poor Palamon!

Cornets. Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Pirithous, Arcite as victor, and
Attendants.

THESEUS.
Lo, where our sister is in expectation,
Yet quaking and unsettled.Fairest Emily,
The gods by their divine arbitrament
Have given you this knight; he is a good one
As ever struck at head. Give me your hands.
Receive you her, you him; be plighted with
A love that grows as you decay.

ARCITE.
Emily,
To buy you, I have lost whats dearest to me,
Save what is bought; and yet I purchase cheaply,
As I do rate your value.

THESEUS.
O loved sister,
He speaks now of as brave a knight as eer
Did spur a noble steed. Surely the gods
Would have him die a bachelor, lest his race
Should show i th world too godlike. His behaviour
So charmed me that methought Alcides was
To him a sow of lead. If I could praise
Each part of him to th all I have spoke, your Arcite
Did not lose by t, for he that was thus good
Encountered yet his better. I have heard
Two emulous Philomels beat the ear o th night
With their contentious throats, now one the higher,
Anon the other, then again the first,
And by-and-by out-breasted, that the sense
Could not be judge between em. So it fared
Good space between these kinsmen, till heavens did
Make hardly one the winner.Wear the garland
With joy that you have won.For the subdued,
Give them our present justice, since I know
Their lives but pinch em. Let it here be done.
The scenes not for our seeing. Go we hence
Right joyful, with some sorrow.Arm your prize;
I know you will not lose her.Hippolyta,
I see one eye of yours conceives a tear,
The which it will deliver.

[_Flourish._]

EMILIA.
Is this winning?
O all you heavenly powers, where is your mercy?
But that your wills have said it must be so,
And charge me live to comfort this unfriended,
This miserable prince, that cuts away
A life more worthy from him than all women,
I should and would die too.

HIPPOLYTA.
Infinite pity
That four such eyes should be so fixed on one
That two must needs be blind for t.

THESEUS.
So it is.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The same; a Block prepared

Enter Palamon and his Knights pinioned; Jailer, Executioner and Guard.

PALAMON.
Theres many a man alive that hath outlived
The love o th people; yea, i th selfsame state
Stands many a father with his child. Some comfort
We have by so considering. We expire,
And not without mens pity; to live still,
Have their good wishes; we prevent
The loathsome misery of age, beguile
The gout and rheum that in lag hours attend
For gray approachers; we come towards the gods
Young and unwappered, not halting under crimes
Many and stale. That sure shall please the gods
Sooner than such, to give us nectar with em,
For we are more clear spirits. My dear kinsmen,
Whose lives for this poor comfort are laid down,
You have sold em too too cheap.

FIRST KNIGHT.
What ending could be
Of more content? Oer us the victors have
Fortune, whose title is as momentary,
As to us death is certain. A grain of honour
They not oerweigh us.

SECOND KNIGHT.
Let us bid farewell;
And with our patience anger tottering Fortune,
Who at her certainst reels.

THIRD KNIGHT.
Come; who begins?

PALAMON.
Een he that led you to this banquet shall
Taste to you all.Ah ha, my friend, my friend,
Your gentle daughter gave me freedom once;
Youll see t done now for ever. Pray, how does she?
I heard she was not well; her kind of ill
Gave me some sorrow.

JAILER.
Sir, shes well restored,
And to be married shortly.

PALAMON.
By my short life,
I am most glad ont. Tis the latest thing
I shall be glad of; prithee, tell her so.
Commend me to her, and, to piece her portion,
Tender her this.

[_Gives him his purse._]

FIRST KNIGHT.
Nay lets be offerers all.

SECOND KNIGHT.
Is it a maid?

PALAMON.
Verily, I think so.
A right good creature, more to me deserving
Then I can quite or speak of.

ALL KNIGHTS.
Commend us to her.

[_They give their purses._]

JAILER.
The gods requite you all, and make her thankful.

PALAMON.
Adieu; and let my life be now as short
As my leave-taking.

[_Lays his head on the block._]

FIRST KNIGHT.
Lead, courageous cousin.

SECOND AND THIRD KNIGHT.
Well follow cheerfully.

[_A great noise within crying Run! Save! Hold!_]

Enter in haste a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Hold, hold! O hold, hold, hold!

Enter Pirithous in haste.

PIRITHOUS.
Hold, ho! It is a cursed haste you made
If you have done so quickly!Noble Palamon,
The gods will show their glory in a life
That thou art yet to lead.

PALAMON.
Can that be,
When Venus, I have said, is false? How do things fare?

PIRITHOUS.
Arise, great sir, and give the tidings ear
That are most dearly sweet and bitter.

PALAMON.
What
Hath waked us from our dream?

PIRITHOUS.
List, then. Your cousin,
Mounted upon a steed that Emily
Did first bestow on him, a black one, owing
Not a hair-worth of white, which some will say
Weakens his price, and many will not buy
His goodness with this note, which superstition
Here finds allowanceon this horse is Arcite
Trotting the stones of Athens, which the calkins
Did rather tell than trample; for the horse
Would make his length a mile, if t pleased his rider
To put pride in him. As he thus went counting
The flinty pavement, dancing, as twere, to th music
His own hooves madefor, as they say, from iron
Came musics originwhat envious flint,
Cold as old Saturn, and like him possessed
With fire malevolent, darted a spark,
Or what fierce sulphur else, to this end made,
I comment not; the hot horse, hot as fire,
Took toy at this and fell to what disorder
His power could give his will; bounds, comes on end,
Forgets school-doing, being therein trained
And of kind manage. Pig-like he whines
At the sharp rowel, which he frets at rather
Than any jot obeys; seeks all foul means
Of boistrous and rough jadry to disseat
His lord that kept it bravely. When naught served,
When neither curb would crack, girth break, nor diffring plunges
Disroot his rider whence he grew, but that
He kept him tween his legs, on his hind hoofs
On end he stands
That Arcites legs, being higher than his head,
Seemed with strange art to hang. His victors wreath
Even then fell off his head and presently
Backward the jade comes oer, and his full poise
Becomes the riders load. Yet is he living,
But such a vessel tis that floats but for
The surge that next approaches. He much desires
To have some speech with you. Lo, he appears.

Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Emilia, Arcite in a chair.

PALAMON.
O miserable end of our alliance!
The gods are mighty. Arcite, if thy heart,
Thy worthy, manly heart, be yet unbroken,
Give me thy last words. I am Palamon,
One that yet loves thee dying.

ARCITE.
Take Emilia
And with her all the worlds joy. Reach thy hand;
Farewell. I have told my last hour. I was false,
Yet never treacherous. Forgive me, cousin.
One kiss from fair Emilia.

[_Emilia kisses Arcite._]

Tis done.
Take her. I die.

PALAMON.
Thy brave soul seek Elysium!

[_Arcite dies._]

EMILIA.
Ill close thine eyes, Prince; blessed souls be with thee!
Thou art a right good man, and, while I live,
This day I give to tears.

PALAMON.
And I to honour.

THESEUS.
In this place first you fought; een very here
I sundered you. Acknowledge to the gods
Our thanks that you are living.
His part is played, and, though it were too short,
He did it well; your day is lengthened, and
The blissful dew of heaven does arrose you.
The powerful Venus well hath graced her altar,
And given you your love. Our master Mars,
Hath vouched his oracle, and to Arcite gave
The grace of the contention. So the deities
Have showed due justice.Bear this hence.

PALAMON.
O cousin,
That we should things desire, which do cost us
The loss of our desire! That naught could buy
Dear love, but loss of dear love!

[_Arcites body is carried out._]

THESEUS.
Never Fortune
Did play a subtler game. The conquered triumphs;
The victor has the loss; yet in the passage
The gods have been most equal. Palamon,
Your kinsman hath confessed the right o th lady
Did lie in you, for you first saw her and
Even then proclaimed your fancy. He restored her
As your stoln jewel and desired your spirit
To send him hence forgiven. The gods my justice
Take from my hand and they themselves become
The executioners. Lead your lady off
And call your lovers from the stage of death,
Whom I adopt my friends. A day or two
Let us look sadly, and give grace unto
The funeral of Arcite, in whose end
The visages of bridegrooms well put on
And smile with Palamon; for whom an hour,
But one hour since, I was as dearly sorry
As glad of Arcite, and am now as glad
As for him sorry. O you heavenly charmers,
What things you make of us! For what we lack
We laugh, for what we have are sorry, still
Are children in some kind. Let us be thankful
For that which is, and with you leave dispute
That are above our question. Lets go off
And bear us like the time.

[_Flourish. Exeunt._]




EPILOGUE


Enter Epilogue.

EPILOGUE
 I would now ask ye how you like the play,
But, as it is with schoolboys, cannot say.
I am cruel fearful! Pray yet, stay a while,
And let me look upon ye. No man smile?
Then it goes hard, I see. He that has
Loved a young handsome wench, then, show his face
Tis strange if none be hereand, if he will,
Against his conscience let him hiss, and kill
Our market. Tis in vain, I see, to stay ye.
Have at the worst can come, then! Now what say ye?
And yet mistake me not: I am not bold;
We have no such cause. If the tale we have told
For tis no otherany way content ye
For to that honest purpose it was meant ye
We have our end; and you shall have ere long,
I dare say, many a better, to prolong
Your old loves to us. We, and all our might,
Rest at your service. Gentlemen, good night.

[_Flourish. Exit._]

FINIS




THE WINTERS TALE




Contents

ACT I
Scene I. Sicilia. An Antechamber in Leontes Palace.
Scene II. The same. A Room of State in the Palace.

ACT II
Scene I. Sicilia. A Room in the Palace.
Scene II. The same. The outer Room of a Prison.
Scene III. The same. A Room in the Palace.

ACT III
Scene I. Sicilia. A Street in some Town.
Scene II. The same. A Court of Justice.
Scene III. Bohemia. A desert Country near the Sea.

ACT IV
Scene I. Prologue.
Scene II. Bohemia. A Room in the palace of Polixenes.
Scene III. The same. A Road near the Shepherds cottage.
Scene IV. The same. A Shepherds Cottage.

ACT V
Scene I. Sicilia. A Room in the palace of Leontes.
Scene II. The same. Before the Palace.
Scene III. The same. A Room in Paulinas house.

Dramatis Person

LEONTES, King of Sicilia
MAMILLIUS, his son
CAMILLO, Sicilian Lord
ANTIGONUS, Sicilian Lord
CLEOMENES, Sicilian Lord
DION, Sicilian Lord
POLIXENES, King of Bohemia
FLORIZEL, his son
ARCHIDAMUS, a Bohemian Lord
An Old Shepherd, reputed father of Perdita
CLOWN, his son
AUTOLYCUS, a rogue
A Mariner
A Gaoler
Servant to the Old Shepherd
Other Sicilian Lords
Sicilian Gentlemen
Officers of a Court of Judicature

HERMIONE, Queen to Leontes
PERDITA, daughter to Leontes and Hermione
PAULINA, wife to Antigonus
EMILIA, a lady attending on the Queen
MOPSA, shepherdess
DORCAS, shepherdess
Other Ladies, attending on the Queen

Lords, Ladies, and Attendants; Satyrs for a Dance; Shepherds,
Shepherdesses, Guards, &c.

TIME, as Chorus

Scene: Sometimes in Sicilia; sometimes in Bohemia.




ACT I

SCENE I. Sicilia. An Antechamber in Leontes Palace.

 Enter Camillo and Archidamus.

ARCHIDAMUS.
If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bohemia, on the like occasion
whereon my services are now on foot, you shall see, as I have said,
great difference betwixt our Bohemia and your Sicilia.

CAMILLO.
I think this coming summer the King of Sicilia means to pay Bohemia the
visitation which he justly owes him.

ARCHIDAMUS.
Wherein our entertainment shall shame us; we will be justified in our
loves. For indeed,

CAMILLO.
Beseech you

ARCHIDAMUS.
Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge. We cannot with such
magnificencein so rareI know not what to say. We will give you sleepy
drinks, that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience, may,
though they cannot praise us, as little accuse us.

CAMILLO.
You pay a great deal too dear for whats given freely.

ARCHIDAMUS.
Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs me and as mine
honesty puts it to utterance.

CAMILLO.
Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia. They were trained
together in their childhoods, and there rooted betwixt them then such
an affection which cannot choose but branch now. Since their more
mature dignities and royal necessities made separation of their
society, their encounters, though not personal, have been royally
attorneyed with interchange of gifts, letters, loving embassies, that
they have seemed to be together, though absent; shook hands, as over a
vast; and embraced as it were from the ends of opposed winds. The
heavens continue their loves!

ARCHIDAMUS.
I think there is not in the world either malice or matter to alter it.
You have an unspeakable comfort of your young Prince Mamillius. It is a
gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came into my note.

CAMILLO.
I very well agree with you in the hopes of him. It is a gallant child;
one that indeed physics the subject, makes old hearts fresh. They that
went on crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to see him a
man.

ARCHIDAMUS.
Would they else be content to die?

CAMILLO.
Yes, if there were no other excuse why they should desire to live.

ARCHIDAMUS.
If the king had no son, they would desire to live on crutches till he
had one.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. A Room of State in the Palace.

 Enter Leontes, Polixenes, Hermione, Mamillius, Camillo and Attendants.

POLIXENES.
Nine changes of the watery star hath been
The shepherds note since we have left our throne
Without a burden. Time as long again
Would be filld up, my brother, with our thanks;
And yet we should, for perpetuity,
Go hence in debt: and therefore, like a cipher,
Yet standing in rich place, I multiply
With one we thank you many thousands more
That go before it.

LEONTES.
Stay your thanks a while,
And pay them when you part.

POLIXENES.
Sir, thats tomorrow.
I am questiond by my fears, of what may chance
Or breed upon our absence; that may blow
No sneaping winds at home, to make us say
This is put forth too truly. Besides, I have stayd
To tire your royalty.

LEONTES.
We are tougher, brother,
Than you can put us to t.

POLIXENES.
No longer stay.

LEONTES.
One sevenight longer.

POLIXENES.
Very sooth, tomorrow.

LEONTES.
Well part the time between s then: and in that
Ill no gainsaying.

POLIXENES.
Press me not, beseech you, so,
There is no tongue that moves, none, none i th world,
So soon as yours, could win me: so it should now,
Were there necessity in your request, although
Twere needful I denied it. My affairs
Do even drag me homeward: which to hinder
Were, in your love a whip to me; my stay
To you a charge and trouble: to save both,
Farewell, our brother.

LEONTES.
Tongue-tied, our queen? Speak you.

HERMIONE.
I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until
You had drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir,
Charge him too coldly. Tell him you are sure
All in Bohemias well: this satisfaction
The by-gone day proclaimed. Say this to him,
Hes beat from his best ward.

LEONTES.
Well said, Hermione.

HERMIONE.
To tell he longs to see his son were strong.
But let him say so then, and let him go;
But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,
Well thwack him hence with distaffs.
[_To Polixenes._] Yet of your royal presence Ill adventure
The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia
You take my lord, Ill give him my commission
To let him there a month behind the gest
Prefixd fors parting:yet, good deed, Leontes,
I love thee not a jar of th clock behind
What lady she her lord. Youll stay?

POLIXENES.
No, madam.

HERMIONE.
Nay, but you will?

POLIXENES.
I may not, verily.

HERMIONE.
Verily!
You put me off with limber vows; but I,
Though you would seek t unsphere the stars with oaths,
Should yet say Sir, no going. Verily,
You shall not go. A ladys verily is
As potent as a lords. Will go yet?
Force me to keep you as a prisoner,
Not like a guest: so you shall pay your fees
When you depart, and save your thanks. How say you?
My prisoner or my guest? By your dread verily,
One of them you shall be.

POLIXENES.
Your guest, then, madam.
To be your prisoner should import offending;
Which is for me less easy to commit
Than you to punish.

HERMIONE.
Not your gaoler then,
But your kind hostess. Come, Ill question you
Of my lords tricks and yours when you were boys.
You were pretty lordings then.

POLIXENES.
We were, fair queen,
Two lads that thought there was no more behind
But such a day tomorrow as today,
And to be boy eternal.

HERMIONE.
Was not my lord
The verier wag o th two?

POLIXENES.
We were as twinnd lambs that did frisk i th sun
And bleat the one at th other. What we changd
Was innocence for innocence; we knew not
The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dreamd
That any did. Had we pursud that life,
And our weak spirits neer been higher reard
With stronger blood, we should have answerd heaven
Boldly Not guilty, the imposition cleard
Hereditary ours.

HERMIONE.
By this we gather
You have trippd since.

POLIXENES.
O my most sacred lady,
Temptations have since then been born to s! for
In those unfledgd days was my wife a girl;
Your precious self had then not crossd the eyes
Of my young play-fellow.

HERMIONE.
Grace to boot!
Of this make no conclusion, lest you say
Your queen and I are devils. Yet go on;
Th offences we have made you do well answer,
If you first sinnd with us, and that with us
You did continue fault, and that you slippd not
With any but with us.

LEONTES.
Is he won yet?

HERMIONE.
Hell stay, my lord.

LEONTES.
At my request he would not.
Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokst
To better purpose.

HERMIONE.
Never?

LEONTES.
Never but once.

HERMIONE.
What! have I twice said well? when wast before?
I prithee tell me. Cram s with praise, and make s
As fat as tame things: one good deed dying tongueless
Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
Our praises are our wages. You may ride s
With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere
With spur we heat an acre. But to th goal:
My last good deed was to entreat his stay.
What was my first? It has an elder sister,
Or I mistake you: O, would her name were Grace!
But once before I spoke to the purposewhen?
Nay, let me havet; I long.

LEONTES.
Why, that was when
Three crabbed months had sourd themselves to death,
Ere I could make thee open thy white hand
And clap thyself my love; then didst thou utter
I am yours for ever.

HERMIONE.
Tis Grace indeed.
Why, lo you now, I have spoke to th purpose twice.
The one for ever earnd a royal husband;
Th other for some while a friend.

 [_Giving her hand to Polixenes._]

LEONTES.
[_Aside._] Too hot, too hot!
To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods.
I have _tremor cordis_ on me. My heart dances,
But not for joy,not joy. This entertainment
May a free face put on, derive a liberty
From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom,
And well become the agent: t may, I grant:
But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers,
As now they are, and making practisd smiles
As in a looking-glass; and then to sigh, as twere
The mort o th deer. O, that is entertainment
My bosom likes not, nor my brows. Mamillius,
Art thou my boy?

MAMILLIUS.
Ay, my good lord.

LEONTES.
I fecks!
Why, thats my bawcock. What! hast smutchd thy nose?
They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,
We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain:
And yet the steer, the heifer, and the calf
Are all calld neat.Still virginalling
Upon his palm?How now, you wanton calf!
Art thou my calf?

MAMILLIUS.
Yes, if you will, my lord.

LEONTES.
Thou wantst a rough pash and the shoots that I have
To be full like me:yet they say we are
Almost as like as eggs; women say so,
That will say anything. But were they false
As oer-dyd blacks, as wind, as waters, false
As dice are to be wishd by one that fixes
No bourn twixt his and mine, yet were it true
To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page,
Look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain!
Most dearst! my collop! Can thy dam?mayt be?
Affection! thy intention stabs the centre:
Thou dost make possible things not so held,
Communicatst with dreams;how can this be?
With whats unreal thou coactive art,
And fellowst nothing: then tis very credent
Thou mayst co-join with something; and thou dost,
And that beyond commission, and I find it,
And that to the infection of my brains
And hardening of my brows.

POLIXENES.
What means Sicilia?

HERMIONE.
He something seems unsettled.

POLIXENES.
How, my lord?
What cheer? How ist with you, best brother?

HERMIONE.
You look
As if you held a brow of much distraction:
Are you movd, my lord?

LEONTES.
No, in good earnest.
How sometimes nature will betray its folly,
Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime
To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines
Of my boys face, methoughts I did recoil
Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreechd,
In my green velvet coat; my dagger muzzled
Lest it should bite its master, and so prove,
As ornaments oft do, too dangerous.
How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
This squash, this gentleman. Mine honest friend,
Will you take eggs for money?

MAMILLIUS.
No, my lord, Ill fight.

LEONTES.
You will? Why, happy man be s dole! My brother,
Are you so fond of your young prince as we
Do seem to be of ours?

POLIXENES.
If at home, sir,
Hes all my exercise, my mirth, my matter:
Now my sworn friend, and then mine enemy;
My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all.
He makes a Julys day short as December;
And with his varying childness cures in me
Thoughts that would thick my blood.

LEONTES.
So stands this squire
Officd with me. We two will walk, my lord,
And leave you to your graver steps. Hermione,
How thou lovst us show in our brothers welcome;
Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap:
Next to thyself and my young rover, hes
Apparent to my heart.

HERMIONE.
If you would seek us,
We are yours i the garden. Shall s attend you there?

LEONTES.
To your own bents dispose you: youll be found,
Be you beneath the sky. [_Aside._] I am angling now,
Though you perceive me not how I give line.
Go to, go to!
How she holds up the neb, the bill to him!
And arms her with the boldness of a wife
To her allowing husband!

 [_Exeunt Polixenes, Hermione and Attendants._]

Gone already!
Inch-thick, knee-deep, oer head and ears a forkd one!
Go, play, boy, play. Thy mother plays, and I
Play too; but so disgracd a part, whose issue
Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour
Will be my knell. Go, play, boy, play. There have been,
Or I am much deceivd, cuckolds ere now;
And many a man there is, even at this present,
Now while I speak this, holds his wife by th arm,
That little thinks she has been sluicd in s absence,
And his pond fishd by his next neighbour, by
Sir Smile, his neighbour. Nay, theres comfort in t,
Whiles other men have gates, and those gates opend,
As mine, against their will. Should all despair
That hath revolted wives, the tenth of mankind
Would hang themselves. Physic fort theres none;
It is a bawdy planet, that will strike
Where tis predominant; and tis powerful, think it,
From east, west, north, and south. Be it concluded,
No barricado for a belly. Knowt;
It will let in and out the enemy
With bag and baggage. Many thousand of us
Have the disease, and feelt not.How now, boy!

MAMILLIUS.
I am like you, they say.

LEONTES.
Why, thats some comfort.
What! Camillo there?

CAMILLO.
Ay, my good lord.

LEONTES.
Go play, Mamillius; thourt an honest man.

 [_Exit Mamillius._]

Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.

CAMILLO.
You had much ado to make his anchor hold:
When you cast out, it still came home.

LEONTES.
Didst note it?

CAMILLO.
He would not stay at your petitions; made
His business more material.

LEONTES.
Didst perceive it?
[_Aside._] Theyre here with me already; whispring, rounding,
Sicilia is a so-forth. Tis far gone
When I shall gust it last.How camet, Camillo,
That he did stay?

CAMILLO.
At the good queens entreaty.

LEONTES.
At the queens bet: good should be pertinent,
But so it is, it is not. Was this taken
By any understanding pate but thine?
For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in
More than the common blocks. Not noted, ist,
But of the finer natures? by some severals
Of head-piece extraordinary? lower messes
Perchance are to this business purblind? say.

CAMILLO.
Business, my lord? I think most understand
Bohemia stays here longer.

LEONTES.
Ha?

CAMILLO.
Stays here longer.

LEONTES.
Ay, but why?

CAMILLO.
To satisfy your highness, and the entreaties
Of our most gracious mistress.

LEONTES.
Satisfy?
Th entreaties of your mistress? Satisfy?
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo,
With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
My chamber-counsels, wherein, priest-like, thou
Hast cleansd my bosom; I from thee departed
Thy penitent reformd. But we have been
Deceivd in thy integrity, deceivd
In that which seems so.

CAMILLO.
Be it forbid, my lord!

LEONTES.
To bide upont: thou art not honest; or,
If thou inclinst that way, thou art a coward,
Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
From course requird; or else thou must be counted
A servant grafted in my serious trust,
And therein negligent; or else a fool
That seest a game playd home, the rich stake drawn,
And takst it all for jest.

CAMILLO.
My gracious lord,
I may be negligent, foolish, and fearful;
In every one of these no man is free,
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Among the infinite doings of the world,
Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord,
If ever I were wilful-negligent,
It was my folly; if industriously
I playd the fool, it was my negligence,
Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
To do a thing, where I the issue doubted,
Whereof the execution did cry out
Against the non-performance, twas a fear
Which oft affects the wisest: these, my lord,
Are such allowd infirmities that honesty
Is never free of. But, beseech your Grace,
Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass
By its own visage: if I then deny it,
Tis none of mine.

LEONTES.
Ha not you seen, Camillo?
(But thats past doubt: you have, or your eye-glass
Is thicker than a cuckolds horn) or heard?
(For, to a vision so apparent, rumour
Cannot be mute) or thought? (for cogitation
Resides not in that man that does not think)
My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess,
Or else be impudently negative,
To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say
My wifes a hobby-horse, deserves a name
As rank as any flax-wench that puts to
Before her troth-plight: sayt and justifyt.

CAMILLO.
I would not be a stander-by to hear
My sovereign mistress clouded so, without
My present vengeance taken: shrew my heart,
You never spoke what did become you less
Than this; which to reiterate were sin
As deep as that, though true.

LEONTES.
Is whispering nothing?
Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses?
Kissing with inside lip? Stopping the career
Of laughter with a sigh?a note infallible
Of breaking honesty?horsing foot on foot?
Skulking in corners? Wishing clocks more swift?
Hours, minutes? Noon, midnight? and all eyes
Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
That would unseen be wicked? Is this nothing?
Why, then the world and all thats int is nothing,
The covering sky is nothing, Bohemia nothing,
My wife is nothing, nor nothing have these nothings,
If this be nothing.

CAMILLO.
Good my lord, be curd
Of this diseasd opinion, and betimes,
For tis most dangerous.

LEONTES.
Say it be, tis true.

CAMILLO.
No, no, my lord.

LEONTES.
It is; you lie, you lie:
I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee,
Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
Or else a hovering temporizer that
Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
Inclining to them both. Were my wifes liver
Infected as her life, she would not live
The running of one glass.

CAMILLO.
Who does infect her?

LEONTES.
Why, he that wears her like her medal, hanging
About his neck, Bohemia: who, if I
Had servants true about me, that bare eyes
To see alike mine honour as their profits,
Their own particular thrifts, they would do that
Which should undo more doing: ay, and thou,
His cupbearer,whom I from meaner form
Have benchd and reard to worship, who mayst see
Plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven,
How I am galled,mightst bespice a cup,
To give mine enemy a lasting wink;
Which draught to me were cordial.

CAMILLO.
Sir, my lord,
I could do this, and that with no rash potion,
But with a lingring dram, that should not work
Maliciously like poison. But I cannot
Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,
So sovereignly being honourable.
I have lovd thee,

LEONTES.
Make that thy question, and go rot!
Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
To appoint myself in this vexation; sully
The purity and whiteness of my sheets,
(Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted
Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps)
Give scandal to the blood o th prince, my son,
(Who I do think is mine, and love as mine)
Without ripe moving tot? Would I do this?
Could man so blench?

CAMILLO.
I must believe you, sir:
I do; and will fetch off Bohemia fort;
Provided that, when hes removd, your highness
Will take again your queen as yours at first,
Even for your sons sake, and thereby for sealing
The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms
Known and allied to yours.

LEONTES.
Thou dost advise me
Even so as I mine own course have set down:
Ill give no blemish to her honour, none.

CAMILLO.
My lord,
Go then; and with a countenance as clear
As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia
And with your queen. I am his cupbearer.
If from me he have wholesome beverage,
Account me not your servant.

LEONTES.
This is all:
Dot, and thou hast the one half of my heart;
Dot not, thou splittst thine own.

CAMILLO.
Ill dot, my lord.

LEONTES.
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advisd me.

 [_Exit._]

CAMILLO.
O miserable lady! But, for me,
What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
Of good Polixenes, and my ground to dot
Is the obedience to a master; one
Who, in rebellion with himself, will have
All that are his so too. To do this deed,
Promotion follows. If I could find example
Of thousands that had struck anointed kings
And flourishd after, Id not dot. But since
Nor brass, nor stone, nor parchment, bears not one,
Let villainy itself forsweart. I must
Forsake the court: to dot, or no, is certain
To me a break-neck. Happy star reign now!
Here comes Bohemia.

 Enter Polixenes.

POLIXENES.
This is strange. Methinks
My favour here begins to warp. Not speak?
Good day, Camillo.

CAMILLO.
Hail, most royal sir!

POLIXENES.
What is the news i th court?

CAMILLO.
None rare, my lord.

POLIXENES.
The king hath on him such a countenance
As he had lost some province, and a region
Lovd as he loves himself. Even now I met him
With customary compliment, when he,
Wafting his eyes to the contrary, and falling
A lip of much contempt, speeds from me, and
So leaves me to consider what is breeding
That changes thus his manners.

CAMILLO.
I dare not know, my lord.

POLIXENES.
How, dare not? Do not? Do you know, and dare not?
Be intelligent to me? Tis thereabouts;
For, to yourself, what you do know, you must,
And cannot say you dare not. Good Camillo,
Your changd complexions are to me a mirror
Which shows me mine changd too; for I must be
A party in this alteration, finding
Myself thus alterd witht.

CAMILLO.
There is a sickness
Which puts some of us in distemper, but
I cannot name the disease, and it is caught
Of you that yet are well.

POLIXENES.
How caught of me?
Make me not sighted like the basilisk.
I have lookd on thousands who have sped the better
By my regard, but killd none so. Camillo,
As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto
Clerk-like, experiencd, which no less adorns
Our gentry than our parents noble names,
In whose success we are gentle,I beseech you,
If you know aught which does behove my knowledge
Thereof to be informd, imprisont not
In ignorant concealment.

CAMILLO.
I may not answer.

POLIXENES.
A sickness caught of me, and yet I well?
I must be answerd. Dost thou hear, Camillo,
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man
Which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least
Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare
What incidency thou dost guess of harm
Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near;
Which way to be prevented, if to be;
If not, how best to bear it.

CAMILLO.
Sir, I will tell you;
Since I am chargd in honour, and by him
That I think honourable. Therefore mark my counsel,
Which must be evn as swiftly followd as
I mean to utter it, or both yourself and me
Cry lost, and so goodnight!

POLIXENES.
On, good Camillo.

CAMILLO.
I am appointed him to murder you.

POLIXENES.
By whom, Camillo?

CAMILLO.
By the king.

POLIXENES.
For what?

CAMILLO.
He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears,
As he had seent or been an instrument
To vice you tot, that you have touchd his queen
Forbiddenly.

POLIXENES.
O, then my best blood turn
To an infected jelly, and my name
Be yokd with his that did betray the Best!
Turn then my freshest reputation to
A savour that may strike the dullest nostril
Where I arrive, and my approach be shunnd,
Nay, hated too, worse than the greatst infection
That eer was heard or read!

CAMILLO.
Swear his thought over
By each particular star in heaven and
By all their influences, you may as well
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
As or by oath remove or counsel shake
The fabric of his folly, whose foundation
Is pild upon his faith, and will continue
The standing of his body.

POLIXENES.
How should this grow?

CAMILLO.
I know not: but I am sure tis safer to
Avoid whats grown than question how tis born.
If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
That lies enclosed in this trunk, which you
Shall bear along impawnd, away tonight.
Your followers I will whisper to the business,
And will by twos and threes, at several posterns,
Clear them o th city. For myself, Ill put
My fortunes to your service, which are here
By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain,
For, by the honour of my parents, I
Have utterd truth: which if you seek to prove,
I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer
Than one condemned by the kings own mouth,
Thereon his execution sworn.

POLIXENES.
I do believe thee.
I saw his heart in s face. Give me thy hand,
Be pilot to me, and thy places shall
Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready, and
My people did expect my hence departure
Two days ago. This jealousy
Is for a precious creature: as shes rare,
Must it be great; and, as his persons mighty,
Must it be violent; and as he does conceive
He is dishonourd by a man which ever
Professd to him, why, his revenges must
In that be made more bitter. Fear oershades me.
Good expedition be my friend, and comfort
The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing
Of his ill-taen suspicion! Come, Camillo,
I will respect thee as a father if
Thou bearst my life off hence. Let us avoid.

CAMILLO.
It is in mine authority to command
The keys of all the posterns: please your highness
To take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT II

SCENE I. Sicilia. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Hermione, Mamillius and Ladies.

HERMIONE.
Take the boy to you: he so troubles me,
Tis past enduring.

FIRST LADY.
Come, my gracious lord,
Shall I be your playfellow?

MAMILLIUS.
No, Ill none of you.

FIRST LADY.
Why, my sweet lord?

MAMILLIUS.
Youll kiss me hard, and speak to me as if
I were a baby still. I love you better.

SECOND LADY.
And why so, my lord?

MAMILLIUS.
Not for because
Your brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say,
Become some women best, so that there be not
Too much hair there, but in a semicircle
Or a half-moon made with a pen.

SECOND LADY.
Who taught this?

MAMILLIUS.
I learnd it out of womens faces. Pray now,
What colour are your eyebrows?

FIRST LADY.
Blue, my lord.

MAMILLIUS.
Nay, thats a mock. I have seen a ladys nose
That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.

FIRST LADY.
Hark ye,
The queen your mother rounds apace. We shall
Present our services to a fine new prince
One of these days, and then youd wanton with us,
If we would have you.

SECOND LADY.
She is spread of late
Into a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!

HERMIONE.
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, now
I am for you again. Pray you sit by us,
And tell s a tale.

MAMILLIUS.
Merry or sad shallt be?

HERMIONE.
As merry as you will.

MAMILLIUS.
A sad tales best for winter. I have one
Of sprites and goblins.

HERMIONE.
Lets have that, good sir.
Come on, sit down. Come on, and do your best
To fright me with your sprites: youre powerful at it.

MAMILLIUS.
There was a man,

HERMIONE.
Nay, come, sit down, then on.

MAMILLIUS.
Dwelt by a churchyard. I will tell it softly,
Yond crickets shall not hear it.

HERMIONE.
Come on then,
And givet me in mine ear.

 Enter Leontes, Antigonus, Lords and Guards.

LEONTES.
Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?

FIRST LORD.
Behind the tuft of pines I met them, never
Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyd them
Even to their ships.

LEONTES.
How blest am I
In my just censure, in my true opinion!
Alack, for lesser knowledge! How accursd
In being so blest! There may be in the cup
A spider steepd, and one may drink, depart,
And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge
Is not infected; but if one present
Th abhorrd ingredient to his eye, make known
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,
With violent hefts. I have drunk, and seen the spider.
Camillo was his help in this, his pander.
There is a plot against my life, my crown;
Alls true that is mistrusted. That false villain
Whom I employd, was pre-employd by him.
He has discoverd my design, and I
Remain a pinchd thing; yea, a very trick
For them to play at will. How came the posterns
So easily open?

FIRST LORD.
By his great authority,
Which often hath no less prevaild than so
On your command.

LEONTES.
I knowt too well.
Give me the boy. I am glad you did not nurse him.
Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you
Have too much blood in him.

HERMIONE.
What is this? sport?

LEONTES.
Bear the boy hence, he shall not come about her,
Away with him, and let her sport herself
With that shes big with; for tis Polixenes
Has made thee swell thus.

 [_Exit Mamillius with some of the Guards._]

HERMIONE.
But Id say he had not,
And Ill be sworn you would believe my saying,
Howeer you learn th nayward.

LEONTES.
You, my lords,
Look on her, mark her well. Be but about
To say, she is a goodly lady, and
The justice of your hearts will thereto add
Tis pity shes not honest, honourable:
Praise her but for this her without-door form,
Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight
The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands
That calumny doth useO, I am out,
That mercy does; for calumny will sear
Virtue itselfthese shrugs, these hums, and has,
When you have said shes goodly, come between,
Ere you can say shes honest: but be it known,
From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,
Shes an adultress!

HERMIONE.
Should a villain say so,
The most replenishd villain in the world,
He were as much more villain: you, my lord,
Do but mistake.

LEONTES.
You have mistook, my lady,
Polixenes for Leontes. O thou thing,
Which Ill not call a creature of thy place,
Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,
Should a like language use to all degrees,
And mannerly distinguishment leave out
Betwixt the prince and beggar. I have said
Shes an adultress; I have said with whom:
More, shes a traitor, and Camillo is
A federary with her; and one that knows
What she should shame to know herself
But with her most vile principal, that shes
A bed-swerver, even as bad as those
That vulgars give boldst titles; ay, and privy
To this their late escape.

HERMIONE.
No, by my life,
Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you,
When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
You thus have publishd me! Gentle my lord,
You scarce can right me throughly then, to say
You did mistake.

LEONTES.
No. If I mistake
In those foundations which I build upon,
The centre is not big enough to bear
A school-boys top. Away with her to prison!
He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty
But that he speaks.

HERMIONE.
Theres some ill planet reigns:
I must be patient till the heavens look
With an aspect more favourable. Good my lords,
I am not prone to weeping, as our sex
Commonly are; the want of which vain dew
Perchance shall dry your pities. But I have
That honourable grief lodgd here which burns
Worse than tears drown: beseech you all, my lords,
With thoughts so qualified as your charities
Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so
The kings will be performd.

LEONTES.
Shall I be heard?

HERMIONE.
Who ist that goes with me? Beseech your highness
My women may be with me, for you see
My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools;
There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress
Has deservd prison, then abound in tears
As I come out: this action I now go on
Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord:
I never wishd to see you sorry; now
I trust I shall. My women, come; you have leave.

LEONTES.
Go, do our bidding. Hence!

 [_Exeunt Queen and Ladies with Guards._]

FIRST LORD.
Beseech your highness, call the queen again.

ANTIGONUS.
Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice
Prove violence, in the which three great ones suffer,
Yourself, your queen, your son.

FIRST LORD.
For her, my lord,
I dare my life lay down, and will dot, sir,
Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless
I th eyes of heaven and to youI mean
In this which you accuse her.

ANTIGONUS.
If it prove
Shes otherwise, Ill keep my stables where
I lodge my wife; Ill go in couples with her;
Than when I feel and see her no further trust her.
For every inch of woman in the world,
Ay, every dram of womans flesh, is false,
If she be.

LEONTES.
Hold your peaces.

FIRST LORD.
Good my lord,

ANTIGONUS.
It is for you we speak, not for ourselves:
You are abusd, and by some putter-on
That will be damnd fort: would I knew the villain,
I would land-damn him. Be she honour-flawd,
I have three daughters; the eldest is eleven;
The second and the third, nine and some five;
If this prove true, theyll pay fort. By mine honour,
Ill geld em all; fourteen they shall not see,
To bring false generations: they are co-heirs,
And I had rather glib myself than they
Should not produce fair issue.

LEONTES.
Cease; no more.
You smell this business with a sense as cold
As is a dead mans nose: but I do seet and feelt,
As you feel doing thus; and see withal
The instruments that feel.

ANTIGONUS.
If it be so,
We need no grave to bury honesty.
Theres not a grain of it the face to sweeten
Of the whole dungy earth.

LEONTES.
What! Lack I credit?

FIRST LORD.
I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,
Upon this ground: and more it would content me
To have her honour true than your suspicion,
Be blamd fort how you might.

LEONTES.
Why, what need we
Commune with you of this, but rather follow
Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness
Imparts this; which, if you, or stupified
Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not
Relish a truth, like us, inform yourselves
We need no more of your advice: the matter,
The loss, the gain, the ordring ont, is all
Properly ours.

ANTIGONUS.
And I wish, my liege,
You had only in your silent judgement tried it,
Without more overture.

LEONTES.
How could that be?
Either thou art most ignorant by age,
Or thou wert born a fool. Camillos flight,
Added to their familiarity,
(Which was as gross as ever touchd conjecture,
That lackd sight only, nought for approbation
But only seeing, all other circumstances
Made up to th deed) doth push on this proceeding.
Yet, for a greater confirmation
(For in an act of this importance, twere
Most piteous to be wild), I have dispatchd in post
To sacred Delphos, to Apollos temple,
Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know
Of stuffd sufficiency: now from the oracle
They will bring all, whose spiritual counsel had,
Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?

FIRST LORD.
Well done, my lord.

LEONTES.
Though I am satisfied, and need no more
Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
Give rest to the minds of others, such as he
Whose ignorant credulity will not
Come up to th truth. So have we thought it good
From our free person she should be confind,
Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence
Be left her to perform. Come, follow us;
We are to speak in public; for this business
Will raise us all.

ANTIGONUS.
[_Aside._] To laughter, as I take it,
If the good truth were known.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. The outer Room of a Prison.

 Enter Paulina, a Gentleman and Attendants.

PAULINA.
The keeper of the prison, call to him;
Let him have knowledge who I am.

 [_Exit the Gentleman._]

Good lady!
No court in Europe is too good for thee;
What dost thou then in prison?

 Enter Gentleman with the Gaoler.

Now, good sir,
You know me, do you not?

GAOLER.
For a worthy lady
And one who much I honour.

PAULINA.
Pray you then,
Conduct me to the queen.

GAOLER.
I may not, madam.
To the contrary I have express commandment.

PAULINA.
Heres ado, to lock up honesty and honour from
Th access of gentle visitors! Ist lawful, pray you,
To see her women? any of them? Emilia?

GAOLER.
So please you, madam,
To put apart these your attendants, I
Shall bring Emilia forth.

PAULINA.
I pray now, call her.
Withdraw yourselves.

 [_Exeunt Gentleman and Attendants._]

GAOLER.
And, madam,
I must be present at your conference.

PAULINA.
Well, bet so, prithee.

 [_Exit Gaoler._]

Heres such ado to make no stain a stain
As passes colouring.

 Re-enter Gaoler with Emilia.

Dear gentlewoman,
How fares our gracious lady?

EMILIA.
As well as one so great and so forlorn
May hold together: on her frights and griefs,
(Which never tender lady hath borne greater)
She is, something before her time, deliverd.

PAULINA.
A boy?

EMILIA.
A daughter; and a goodly babe,
Lusty, and like to live: the queen receives
Much comfort in t; says My poor prisoner,
I am as innocent as you.

PAULINA.
I dare be sworn.
These dangerous unsafe lunes i th king, beshrew them!
He must be told ont, and he shall: the office
Becomes a woman best. Ill taket upon me.
If I prove honey-mouthd, let my tongue blister,
And never to my red-lookd anger be
The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia,
Commend my best obedience to the queen.
If she dares trust me with her little babe,
Ill showt the king, and undertake to be
Her advocate to th loudst. We do not know
How he may soften at the sight o th child:
The silence often of pure innocence
Persuades, when speaking fails.

EMILIA.
Most worthy madam,
Your honour and your goodness is so evident,
That your free undertaking cannot miss
A thriving issue: there is no lady living
So meet for this great errand. Please your ladyship
To visit the next room, Ill presently
Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer,
Who but today hammerd of this design,
But durst not tempt a minister of honour,
Lest she should be denied.

PAULINA.
Tell her, Emilia,
Ill use that tongue I have: if wit flow from t
As boldness from my bosom, lett not be doubted
I shall do good.

EMILIA.
Now be you blest for it!
Ill to the queen: please you come something nearer.

GAOLER.
Madam, if t please the queen to send the babe,
I know not what I shall incur to pass it,
Having no warrant.

PAULINA.
You need not fear it, sir:
This child was prisoner to the womb, and is,
By law and process of great nature thence
Freed and enfranchisd: not a party to
The anger of the king, nor guilty of,
If any be, the trespass of the queen.

GAOLER.
I do believe it.

PAULINA.
Do not you fear: upon mine honour, I
Will stand betwixt you and danger.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Leontes, Antigonus, Lords and other Attendants.

LEONTES.
Nor night nor day no rest: it is but weakness
To bear the matter thus, mere weakness. If
The cause were not in being,part o th cause,
She th adultress; for the harlot king
Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank
And level of my brain, plot-proof. But she
I can hook to me. Say that she were gone,
Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest
Might come to me again. Whos there?

FIRST ATTENDANT.
My lord.

LEONTES.
How does the boy?

FIRST ATTENDANT.
He took good rest tonight;
Tis hopd his sickness is dischargd.

LEONTES.
To see his nobleness,
Conceiving the dishonour of his mother.
He straight declind, droopd, took it deeply,
Fastend and fixd the shame ont in himself,
Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,
And downright languishd. Leave me solely: go,
See how he fares.

 [_Exit First Attendant._]

Fie, fie! no thought of him.
The very thought of my revenges that way
Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty,
And in his parties, his alliance. Let him be,
Until a time may serve. For present vengeance,
Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes
Laugh at me; make their pastime at my sorrow:
They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor
Shall she, within my power.

 Enter Paulina carrying a baby, with Antigonus, lords and servants.

FIRST LORD.
You must not enter.

PAULINA.
Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me:
Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,
Than the queens life? a gracious innocent soul,
More free than he is jealous.

ANTIGONUS.
Thats enough.

SERVANT.
Madam, he hath not slept tonight; commanded
None should come at him.

PAULINA.
Not so hot, good sir;
I come to bring him sleep. Tis such as you,
That creep like shadows by him, and do sigh
At each his needless heavings,such as you
Nourish the cause of his awaking. I
Do come with words as medcinal as true,
Honest as either, to purge him of that humour
That presses him from sleep.

LEONTES.
What noise there, ho?

PAULINA.
No noise, my lord; but needful conference
About some gossips for your highness.

LEONTES.
How!
Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,
I chargd thee that she should not come about me.
I knew she would.

ANTIGONUS.
I told her so, my lord,
On your displeasures peril and on mine,
She should not visit you.

LEONTES.
What, canst not rule her?

PAULINA.
From all dishonesty he can. In this,
Unless he take the course that you have done,
Commit me for committing honourtrust it,
He shall not rule me.

ANTIGONUS.
La you now, you hear.
When she will take the rein I let her run;
But shell not stumble.

PAULINA.
Good my liege, I come,
And, I beseech you hear me, who professes
Myself your loyal servant, your physician,
Your most obedient counsellor, yet that dares
Less appear so, in comforting your evils,
Than such as most seem yoursI say I come
From your good queen.

LEONTES.
Good queen!

PAULINA.
Good queen, my lord, good queen: I say, good queen,
And would by combat make her good, so were I
A man, the worst about you.

LEONTES.
Force her hence.

PAULINA.
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
First hand me: on mine own accord Ill off;
But first Ill do my errand. The good queen,
(For she is good) hath brought you forth a daughter;
Here tis; commends it to your blessing.

 [_Laying down the child._]

LEONTES.
Out!
A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o door:
A most intelligencing bawd!

PAULINA.
Not so.
I am as ignorant in that as you
In so entitling me; and no less honest
Than you are mad; which is enough, Ill warrant,
As this world goes, to pass for honest.

LEONTES.
Traitors!
Will you not push her out? [_To Antigonus._] Give her the bastard,
Thou dotard! Thou art woman-tird, unroosted
By thy Dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard,
Taket up, I say; givet to thy crone.

PAULINA.
For ever
Unvenerable be thy hands, if thou
Takst up the princess by that forced baseness
Which he has put upon t!

LEONTES.
He dreads his wife.

PAULINA.
So I would you did; then twere past all doubt
Youd call your children yours.

LEONTES.
A nest of traitors!

ANTIGONUS.
I am none, by this good light.

PAULINA.
Nor I; nor any
But one thats here, and thats himself. For he
The sacred honour of himself, his queens,
His hopeful sons, his babes, betrays to slander,
Whose sting is sharper than the swords; and will not,
(For, as the case now stands, it is a curse
He cannot be compelld tot) once remove
The root of his opinion, which is rotten
As ever oak or stone was sound.

LEONTES.
A callat
Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband,
And now baits me! This brat is none of mine;
It is the issue of Polixenes.
Hence with it, and together with the dam
Commit them to the fire.

PAULINA.
It is yours;
And, might we lay th old proverb to your charge,
So like you tis the worse. Behold, my lords,
Although the print be little, the whole matter
And copy of the father: eye, nose, lip,
The trick of s frown, his forehead; nay, the valley,
The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek; his smiles;
The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger:
And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it
So like to him that got it, if thou hast
The ordering of the mind too, mongst all colours
No yellow in t, lest she suspect, as he does,
Her children not her husbands!

LEONTES.
A gross hag!
And, losel, thou art worthy to be hangd
That wilt not stay her tongue.

ANTIGONUS.
Hang all the husbands
That cannot do that feat, youll leave yourself
Hardly one subject.

LEONTES.
Once more, take her hence.

PAULINA.
A most unworthy and unnatural lord
Can do no more.

LEONTES.
Ill have thee burnt.

PAULINA.
I care not.
It is an heretic that makes the fire,
Not she which burns in t. Ill not call you tyrant;
But this most cruel usage of your queen,
Not able to produce more accusation
Than your own weak-hingd fancy, something savours
Of tyranny, and will ignoble make you,
Yea, scandalous to the world.

LEONTES.
On your allegiance,
Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,
Where were her life? She durst not call me so,
If she did know me one. Away with her!

PAULINA.
I pray you, do not push me; Ill be gone.
Look to your babe, my lord; tis yours: Jove send her
A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands?
You that are thus so tender oer his follies,
Will never do him good, not one of you.
So, so. Farewell; we are gone.

 [_Exit._]

LEONTES.
Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.
My child? Away witht. Even thou, that hast
A heart so tender oer it, take it hence,
And see it instantly consumd with fire;
Even thou, and none but thou. Take it up straight:
Within this hour bring me word tis done,
And by good testimony, or Ill seize thy life,
With that thou else callst thine. If thou refuse
And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so;
The bastard brains with these my proper hands
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire;
For thou setst on thy wife.

ANTIGONUS.
I did not, sir:
These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,
Can clear me in t.

LORDS
We can: my royal liege,
He is not guilty of her coming hither.

LEONTES.
Youre liars all.

FIRST LORD.
Beseech your highness, give us better credit:
We have always truly servd you; and beseech
So to esteem of us. And on our knees we beg,
As recompense of our dear services
Past and to come, that you do change this purpose,
Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
Lead on to some foul issue. We all kneel.

LEONTES.
I am a feather for each wind that blows.
Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel
And call me father? better burn it now
Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.
It shall not neither. [_To Antigonus._] You, sir, come you hither,
You that have been so tenderly officious
With Lady Margery, your midwife, there,
To save this bastards lifefor tis a bastard,
So sure as this beards grey. What will you adventure
To save this brats life?

ANTIGONUS.
Anything, my lord,
That my ability may undergo,
And nobleness impose: at least thus much:
Ill pawn the little blood which I have left
To save the innocent. Anything possible.

LEONTES.
It shall be possible. Swear by this sword
Thou wilt perform my bidding.

ANTIGONUS.
I will, my lord.

LEONTES.
Mark, and perform it, seest thou? for the fail
Of any point int shall not only be
Death to thyself, but to thy lewd-tongud wife,
Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee,
As thou art liegeman to us, that thou carry
This female bastard hence, and that thou bear it
To some remote and desert place, quite out
Of our dominions; and that there thou leave it,
Without more mercy, to it own protection
And favour of the climate. As by strange fortune
It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
On thy souls peril and thy bodys torture,
That thou commend it strangely to some place
Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.

ANTIGONUS.
I swear to do this, though a present death
Had been more merciful. Come on, poor babe:
Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens
To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say,
Casting their savageness aside, have done
Like offices of pity. Sir, be prosperous
In more than this deed does require! And blessing
Against this cruelty, fight on thy side,
Poor thing, condemnd to loss!

 [_Exit with the child._]

LEONTES.
No, Ill not rear
Anothers issue.

 Enter a Servant.

SERVANT.
Please your highness, posts
From those you sent to th oracle are come
An hour since: Cleomenes and Dion,
Being well arrivd from Delphos, are both landed,
Hasting to th court.

FIRST LORD.
So please you, sir, their speed
Hath been beyond account.

LEONTES.
Twenty-three days
They have been absent: tis good speed; foretells
The great Apollo suddenly will have
The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords;
Summon a session, that we may arraign
Our most disloyal lady; for, as she hath
Been publicly accusd, so shall she have
A just and open trial. While she lives,
My heart will be a burden to me. Leave me,
And think upon my bidding.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT III

SCENE I. Sicilia. A Street in some Town.

 Enter Cleomenes and Dion.

CLEOMENES
The climates delicate; the air most sweet,
Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
The common praise it bears.

DION.
I shall report,
For most it caught me, the celestial habits
(Methinks I so should term them) and the reverence
Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!
How ceremonious, solemn, and unearthly,
It was i th offering!

CLEOMENES
But of all, the burst
And the ear-deafning voice o th oracle,
Kin to Joves thunder, so surprised my sense
That I was nothing.

DION.
If the event o th journey
Prove as successful to the queen,O, bet so!
As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,
The time is worth the use ont.

CLEOMENES
Great Apollo
Turn all to th best! These proclamations,
So forcing faults upon Hermione,
I little like.

DION.
The violent carriage of it
Will clear or end the business: when the oracle,
(Thus by Apollos great divine seald up)
Shall the contents discover, something rare
Even then will rush to knowledge. Go. Fresh horses!
And gracious be the issue!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. A Court of Justice.

 Enter Leontes, Lords and Officers appear, properly seated.

LEONTES.
This sessions (to our great grief we pronounce)
Even pushes gainst our heart: the party tried
The daughter of a king, our wife, and one
Of us too much belovd. Let us be cleard
Of being tyrannous, since we so openly
Proceed in justice, which shall have due course,
Even to the guilt or the purgation.
Produce the prisoner.

OFFICER.
It is his highness pleasure that the queen
Appear in person here in court. Silence!

 Hermione is brought in guarded; Paulina and Ladies attending.

LEONTES.
Read the indictment.

OFFICER.
[_Reads._] Hermione, queen to the worthy Leontes, king of Sicilia,
thou art here accused and arraigned of high treason, in committing
adultery with Polixenes, king of Bohemia; and conspiring with Camillo
to take away the life of our sovereign lord the king, thy royal
husband: the pretence whereof being by circumstances partly laid open,
thou, Hermione, contrary to the faith and allegiance of a true subject,
didst counsel and aid them, for their better safety, to fly away by
night.

HERMIONE.
Since what I am to say must be but that
Which contradicts my accusation, and
The testimony on my part no other
But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me
To say Not guilty. Mine integrity,
Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it,
Be so receivd. But thus, if powers divine
Behold our human actions, as they do,
I doubt not, then, but innocence shall make
False accusation blush, and tyranny
Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know,
Who least will seem to do so, my past life
Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
As I am now unhappy; which is more
Than history can pattern, though devisd
And playd to take spectators. For behold me,
A fellow of the royal bed, which owe
A moiety of the throne, a great kings daughter,
The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing
To prate and talk for life and honour fore
Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it
As I weigh grief, which I would spare. For honour,
Tis a derivative from me to mine,
And only that I stand for. I appeal
To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes
Came to your court, how I was in your grace,
How merited to be so; since he came,
With what encounter so uncurrent I
Have straind t appear thus: if one jot beyond
The bound of honour, or in act or will
That way inclining, hardend be the hearts
Of all that hear me, and my nearst of kin
Cry fie upon my grave!

LEONTES.
I neer heard yet
That any of these bolder vices wanted
Less impudence to gainsay what they did
Than to perform it first.

HERMIONE.
Thats true enough;
Though tis a saying, sir, not due to me.

LEONTES.
You will not own it.

HERMIONE.
More than mistress of
Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not
At all acknowledge. For Polixenes,
With whom I am accusd, I do confess
I lovd him as in honour he requird,
With such a kind of love as might become
A lady like me; with a love even such,
So and no other, as yourself commanded:
Which not to have done, I think had been in me
Both disobedience and ingratitude
To you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke,
Ever since it could speak, from an infant, freely,
That it was yours. Now, for conspiracy,
I know not how it tastes, though it be dishd
For me to try how: all I know of it
Is that Camillo was an honest man;
And why he left your court, the gods themselves,
Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.

LEONTES.
You knew of his departure, as you know
What you have undertaen to do in s absence.

HERMIONE.
Sir,
You speak a language that I understand not:
My life stands in the level of your dreams,
Which Ill lay down.

LEONTES.
Your actions are my dreams.
You had a bastard by Polixenes,
And I but dreamd it. As you were past all shame
(Those of your fact are so) so past all truth,
Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as
Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,
No father owning it (which is, indeed,
More criminal in thee than it), so thou
Shalt feel our justice; in whose easiest passage
Look for no less than death.

HERMIONE.
Sir, spare your threats:
The bug which you would fright me with, I seek.
To me can life be no commodity.
The crown and comfort of my life, your favour,
I do give lost, for I do feel it gone,
But know not how it went. My second joy,
And first-fruits of my body, from his presence
I am barrd, like one infectious. My third comfort,
Starrd most unluckily, is from my breast,
(The innocent milk in its most innocent mouth)
Hald out to murder; myself on every post
Proclaimd a strumpet; with immodest hatred
The child-bed privilege denied, which longs
To women of all fashion; lastly, hurried
Here to this place, i th open air, before
I have got strength of limit. Now, my liege,
Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
That I should fear to die. Therefore proceed.
But yet hear this: mistake me not: no life,
I prize it not a straw, but for mine honour,
Which I would free, if I shall be condemnd
Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else
But what your jealousies awake, I tell you
Tis rigour, and not law. Your honours all,
I do refer me to the oracle:
Apollo be my judge!

FIRST LORD.
This your request
Is altogether just: therefore bring forth,
And in Apollos name, his oracle:

 [_Exeunt certain Officers._]

HERMIONE.
The Emperor of Russia was my father.
O that he were alive, and here beholding
His daughters trial! that he did but see
The flatness of my misery; yet with eyes
Of pity, not revenge!

 Enter Officers with Cleomenes and Dion.

OFFICER.
You here shall swear upon this sword of justice,
That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have
Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
This seald-up oracle, by the hand deliverd
Of great Apollos priest; and that since then
You have not dared to break the holy seal,
Nor read the secrets int.

CLEOMENES, DION.
All this we swear.

LEONTES.
Break up the seals and read.

OFFICER.
[_Reads._] Hermione is chaste; Polixenes blameless; Camillo a true
subject; Leontes a jealous tyrant; his innocent babe truly begotten;
and the king shall live without an heir, if that which is lost be not
found.

LORDS
Now blessed be the great Apollo!

HERMIONE.
Praised!

LEONTES.
Hast thou read truth?

OFFICER.
Ay, my lord, even so
As it is here set down.

LEONTES.
There is no truth at all i th oracle:
The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.

 Enter a Servant hastily.

SERVANT.
My lord the king, the king!

LEONTES.
What is the business?

SERVANT.
O sir, I shall be hated to report it.
The prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
Of the queens speed, is gone.

LEONTES.
How! gone?

SERVANT.
Is dead.

LEONTES.
Apollos angry, and the heavens themselves
Do strike at my injustice.

 [_Hermione faints._]

How now there?

PAULINA.
This news is mortal to the queen. Look down
And see what death is doing.

LEONTES.
Take her hence:
Her heart is but oerchargd; she will recover.
I have too much believd mine own suspicion.
Beseech you tenderly apply to her
Some remedies for life.

 [_Exeunt Paulina and Ladies with Hermione._]

Apollo, pardon
My great profaneness gainst thine oracle!
Ill reconcile me to Polixenes,
New woo my queen,	 recall the good Camillo,
Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy;
For, being transported by my jealousies
To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose
Camillo for the minister to poison
My friend Polixenes: which had been done,
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
My swift command, though I with death and with
Reward did threaten and encourage him,
Not doing it and being done. He, most humane
And filld with honour, to my kingly guest
Unclaspd my practice, quit his fortunes here,
Which you knew great, and to the certain hazard
Of all incertainties himself commended,
No richer than his honour. How he glisters
Thorough my rust! And how his piety
Does my deeds make the blacker!

 Enter Paulina.

PAULINA.
Woe the while!
O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,
Break too!

FIRST LORD.
What fit is this, good lady?

PAULINA.
What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?
What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling
In leads or oils? What old or newer torture
Must I receive, whose every word deserves
To taste of thy most worst? Thy tyranny,
Together working with thy jealousies,
Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle
For girls of nine. O, think what they have done,
And then run mad indeed, stark mad! for all
Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it.
That thou betraydst Polixenes, twas nothing;
That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant
And damnable ingrateful; nor wast much
Thou wouldst have poisond good Camillos honour,
To have him kill a king; poor trespasses,
More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon
The casting forth to crows thy baby daughter,
To be or none or little, though a devil
Would have shed water out of fire ere donet,
Nor ist directly laid to thee the death
Of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts,
Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart
That could conceive a gross and foolish sire
Blemishd his gracious dam: this is not, no,
Laid to thy answer: but the lastO lords,
When I have said, cry Woe!the queen, the queen,
The sweetst, dearst creatures dead, and vengeance fort
Not droppd down yet.

FIRST LORD.
The higher powers forbid!

PAULINA.
I say shes dead: Ill sweart. If word nor oath
Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring
Tincture, or lustre, in her lip, her eye,
Heat outwardly or breath within, Ill serve you
As I would do the gods. But, O thou tyrant!
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
Than all thy woes can stir. Therefore betake thee
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
Upon a barren mountain, and still winter
In storm perpetual, could not move the gods
To look that way thou wert.

LEONTES.
Go on, go on:
Thou canst not speak too much; I have deservd
All tongues to talk their bitterest.

FIRST LORD.
Say no more:
Howeer the business goes, you have made fault
I th boldness of your speech.

PAULINA.
I am sorry for t:
All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
I do repent. Alas, I have showd too much
The rashness of a woman: he is touchd
To th noble heart. Whats gone and whats past help,
Should be past grief. Do not receive affliction
At my petition; I beseech you, rather
Let me be punishd, that have minded you
Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege,
Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman:
The love I bore your queenlo, fool again!
Ill speak of her no more, nor of your children.
Ill not remember you of my own lord,
Who is lost too. Take your patience to you,
And Ill say nothing.

LEONTES.
Thou didst speak but well
When most the truth, which I receive much better
Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee, bring me
To the dead bodies of my queen and son:
One grave shall be for both. Upon them shall
The causes of their death appear, unto
Our shame perpetual. Once a day Ill visit
The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there
Shall be my recreation. So long as nature
Will bear up with this exercise, so long
I daily vow to use it. Come, and lead me
To these sorrows.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Bohemia. A desert Country near the Sea.

 Enter Antigonus with the Child and a Mariner.

ANTIGONUS.
Thou art perfect, then, our ship hath touchd upon
The deserts of Bohemia?

MARINER.
Ay, my lord, and fear
We have landed in ill time: the skies look grimly,
And threaten present blusters. In my conscience,
The heavens with that we have in hand are angry,
And frown upon s.

ANTIGONUS.
Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard;
Look to thy bark: Ill not be long before
I call upon thee.

MARINER.
Make your best haste, and go not
Too far i th land: tis like to be loud weather;
Besides, this place is famous for the creatures
Of prey that keep upon t.

ANTIGONUS.
Go thou away:
Ill follow instantly.

MARINER.
I am glad at heart
To be so rid o th business.

 [_Exit._]

ANTIGONUS.
Come, poor babe.
I have heard, but not believd, the spirits of the dead
May walk again: if such thing be, thy mother
Appeard to me last night; for neer was dream
So like a waking. To me comes a creature,
Sometimes her head on one side, some another.
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow,
So filld and so becoming: in pure white robes,
Like very sanctity, she did approach
My cabin where I lay: thrice bowd before me,
And, gasping to begin some speech, her eyes
Became two spouts. The fury spent, anon
Did this break from her: Good Antigonus,
Since fate, against thy better disposition,
Hath made thy person for the thrower-out
Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia,
There weep, and leave it crying. And, for the babe
Is counted lost for ever, Perdita
I prithee callt. For this ungentle business,
Put on thee by my lord, thou neer shalt see
Thy wife Paulina more. And so, with shrieks,
She melted into air. Affrighted much,
I did in time collect myself and thought
This was so, and no slumber. Dreams are toys,
Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,
I will be squard by this. I do believe
Hermione hath sufferd death, and that
Apollo would, this being indeed the issue
Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid,
Either for life or death, upon the earth
Of its right father. Blossom, speed thee well! There lie; and there thy
character: there these;

 [_Laying down the child and a bundle._]

Which may if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
And still rest thine. The storm begins: poor wretch,
That for thy mothers fault art thus exposd
To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot,
But my heart bleeds, and most accursd am I
To be by oath enjoind to this. Farewell!
The day frowns more and more. Thourt like to have
A lullaby too rough. I never saw
The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour!
Well may I get aboard! This is the chase:
I am gone for ever.

 [_Exit, pursued by a bear._]

 Enter an old Shepherd.

SHEPHERD.
I would there were no age between ten and three-and-twenty, or that
youth would sleep out the rest; for there is nothing in the between but
getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry, stealing,
fightingHark you now! Would any but these boiled brains of nineteen
and two-and-twenty hunt this weather? They have scared away two of my
best sheep, which I fear the wolf will sooner find than the master: if
anywhere I have them, tis by the sea-side, browsing of ivy. Good luck,
an t be thy will, what have we here?

 [_Taking up the child._]

 Mercy on s, a bairn! A very pretty bairn! A boy or a child, I wonder?
 A pretty one; a very pretty one. Sure, some scape. Though I am not
 bookish, yet I can read waiting-gentlewoman in the scape. This has
 been some stair-work, some trunk-work, some behind-door-work. They
 were warmer that got this than the poor thing is here. Ill take it up
 for pity: yet Ill tarry till my son come; he halloed but even now.
 Whoa-ho-hoa!

 Enter Clown.

CLOWN.
Hilloa, loa!

SHEPHERD.
What, art so near? If thoult see a thing to talk on when thou art dead
and rotten, come hither. What ailst thou, man?

CLOWN.
I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land! But I am not to say it
is a sea, for it is now the sky: betwixt the firmament and it, you
cannot thrust a bodkins point.

SHEPHERD.
Why, boy, how is it?

CLOWN.
I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages, how it takes up
the shore! But thats not to the point. O, the most piteous cry of the
poor souls! sometimes to see em, and not to see em. Now the ship
boring the moon with her mainmast, and anon swallowed with yest and
froth, as youd thrust a cork into a hogshead. And then for the land
service, to see how the bear tore out his shoulder-bone, how he cried
to me for help, and said his name was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to
make an end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragond it: but
first, how the poor souls roared, and the sea mocked them, and how the
poor gentleman roared, and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder
than the sea or weather.

SHEPHERD.
Name of mercy, when was this, boy?

CLOWN.
Now, now. I have not winked since I saw these sights: the men are not
yet cold under water, nor the bear half dined on the gentleman. Hes at
it now.

SHEPHERD.
Would I had been by to have helped the old man!

CLOWN.
I would you had been by the ship side, to have helped her: there your
charity would have lacked footing.

SHEPHERD.
Heavy matters, heavy matters! But look thee here, boy. Now bless
thyself: thou metst with things dying, I with things new-born. Heres
a sight for thee. Look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squires child! Look
thee here; take up, take up, boy; opent. So, lets see. It was told me
I should be rich by the fairies. This is some changeling: opent.
Whats within, boy?

CLOWN.
Youre a made old man. If the sins of your youth are forgiven you,
youre well to live. Gold! all gold!

SHEPHERD.
This is fairy gold, boy, and twill prove so. Up with it, keep it
close: home, home, the next way. We are lucky, boy, and to be so still
requires nothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: come, good boy, the next
way home.

CLOWN.
Go you the next way with your findings. Ill go see if the bear be gone
from the gentleman, and how much he hath eaten. They are never curst
but when they are hungry: if there be any of him left, Ill bury it.

SHEPHERD.
Thats a good deed. If thou mayest discern by that which is left of him
what he is, fetch me to th sight of him.

CLOWN.
Marry, will I; and you shall help to put him i th ground.

SHEPHERD.
Tis a lucky day, boy, and well do good deeds on t.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT IV

SCENE I.

 Enter Time, the Chorus.

TIME.
I that please some, try all: both joy and terror
Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error,
Now take upon me, in the name of Time,
To use my wings. Impute it not a crime
To me or my swift passage, that I slide
Oer sixteen years, and leave the growth untried
Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
To oerthrow law, and in one self-born hour
To plant and oerwhelm custom. Let me pass
The same I am, ere ancientst order was
Or what is now received. I witness to
The times that brought them in; so shall I do
To th freshest things now reigning, and make stale
The glistering of this present, as my tale
Now seems to it. Your patience this allowing,
I turn my glass, and give my scene such growing
As you had slept between. Leontes leaving
Th effects of his fond jealousies, so grieving
That he shuts up himself, imagine me,
Gentle spectators, that I now may be
In fair Bohemia, and remember well,
I mentioned a son o th kings, which Florizel
I now name to you; and with speed so pace
To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
Equal with wondering. What of her ensues
I list not prophesy; but let Times news
Be known when tis brought forth. A shepherds daughter,
And what to her adheres, which follows after,
Is th argument of Time. Of this allow,
If ever you have spent time worse ere now;
If never, yet that Time himself doth say
He wishes earnestly you never may.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. Bohemia. A Room in the palace of Polixenes.

 Enter Polixenes and Camillo.

POLIXENES.
I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate: tis a sickness
denying thee anything; a death to grant this.

CAMILLO.
It is fifteen years since I saw my country. Though I have for the most
part been aired abroad, I desire to lay my bones there. Besides, the
penitent king, my master, hath sent for me; to whose feeling sorrows I
might be some allay, or I oerween to think so,which is another spur
to my departure.

POLIXENES.
As thou lovst me, Camillo, wipe not out the rest of thy services by
leaving me now: the need I have of thee, thine own goodness hath made;
better not to have had thee than thus to want thee. Thou, having made
me businesses which none without thee can sufficiently manage, must
either stay to execute them thyself, or take away with thee the very
services thou hast done, which if I have not enough considered (as too
much I cannot) to be more thankful to thee shall be my study; and my
profit therein the heaping friendships. Of that fatal country Sicilia,
prithee speak no more; whose very naming punishes me with the
remembrance of that penitent, as thou callst him, and reconciled king,
my brother; whose loss of his most precious queen and children are even
now to be afresh lamented. Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince
Florizel, my son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not being
gracious, than they are in losing them when they have approved their
virtues.

CAMILLO.
Sir, it is three days since I saw the prince. What his happier affairs
may be, are to me unknown, but I have missingly noted he is of late
much retired from court, and is less frequent to his princely exercises
than formerly he hath appeared.

POLIXENES.
I have considered so much, Camillo, and with some care; so far that I
have eyes under my service which look upon his removedness; from whom I
have this intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a most
homely shepherd, a man, they say, that from very nothing, and beyond
the imagination of his neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.

CAMILLO.
I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a daughter of most rare
note: the report of her is extended more than can be thought to begin
from such a cottage.

POLIXENES.
Thats likewise part of my intelligence: but, I fear, the angle that
plucks our son thither. Thou shalt accompany us to the place, where we
will, not appearing what we are, have some question with the shepherd;
from whose simplicity I think it not uneasy to get the cause of my
sons resort thither. Prithee, be my present partner in this business,
and lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.

CAMILLO.
I willingly obey your command.

POLIXENES.
My best Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. A Road near the Shepherds cottage.

 Enter Autolycus, singing.

AUTOLYCUS.
_When daffodils begin to peer,
    With, hey! the doxy over the dale,
Why, then comes in the sweet o the year,
    For the red blood reigns in the winters pale._

_The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
    With, hey! the sweet birds, O, how they sing!
Doth set my pugging tooth on edge;
    For a quart of ale is a dish for a king._

_The lark, that tirra-lirra chants,
    With, hey! with, hey! the thrush and the jay,
Are summer songs for me and my aunts,
    While we lie tumbling in the hay._

I have served Prince Florizel, and in my time wore three-pile, but now
I am out of service.

_But shall I go mourn for that, my dear?
    The pale moon shines by night:
And when I wander here and there,
    I then do most go right._

_If tinkers may have leave to live,
    And bear the sow-skin budget,
Then my account I well may give
    And in the stocks avouch it._

My traffic is sheets; when the kite builds, look to lesser linen. My
father named me Autolycus; who being, I as am, littered under Mercury,
was likewise a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles. With die and drab I
purchased this caparison, and my revenue is the silly cheat. Gallows
and knock are too powerful on the highway. Beating and hanging are
terrors to me. For the life to come, I sleep out the thought of it. A
prize! a prize!

 Enter Clown.

CLOWN.
Let me see: every leven wether tods; every tod yields pound and odd
shilling; fifteen hundred shorn, what comes the wool to?

AUTOLYCUS.
[_Aside._] If the springe hold, the cocks mine.

CLOWN.
I cannot dot without counters. Let me see; what am I to buy for our
sheep-shearing feast? Three pound of sugar, five pound of currants,
ricewhat will this sister of mine do with rice? But my father hath
made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it on. She hath made me
four-and-twenty nosegays for the shearers, three-man song-men all, and
very good ones; but they are most of them means and basses, but one
puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to hornpipes. I must have
saffron to colour the warden pies; mace; dates, none, thats out of
my note; nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I may beg;
four pound of prunes, and as many of raisins o th sun.

AUTOLYCUS.
[_Grovelling on the ground._] O that ever I was born!

CLOWN.
I th name of me!

AUTOLYCUS.
O, help me, help me! Pluck but off these rags; and then, death, death!

CLOWN.
Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to lay on thee, rather
than have these off.

AUTOLYCUS.
O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more than the stripes I
have received, which are mighty ones and millions.

CLOWN.
Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to a great matter.

AUTOLYCUS.
I am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money and apparel taen from me, and
these detestable things put upon me.

CLOWN.
What, by a horseman or a footman?

AUTOLYCUS.
A footman, sweet sir, a footman.

CLOWN.
Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he has left with thee:
if this be a horsemans coat, it hath seen very hot service. Lend me
thy hand, Ill help thee: come, lend me thy hand.

 [_Helping him up._]

AUTOLYCUS.
O, good sir, tenderly, O!

CLOWN.
Alas, poor soul!

AUTOLYCUS.
O, good sir, softly, good sir. I fear, sir, my shoulder blade is out.

CLOWN.
How now! canst stand?

AUTOLYCUS.
Softly, dear sir! [_Picks his pocket._] good sir, softly. You ha done
me a charitable office.

CLOWN.
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.

AUTOLYCUS.
No, good sweet sir; no, I beseech you, sir: I have a kinsman not past
three-quarters of a mile hence, unto whom I was going. I shall there
have money or anything I want. Offer me no money, I pray you; that
kills my heart.

CLOWN.
What manner of fellow was he that robbed you?

AUTOLYCUS.
A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about with troll-my-dames. I
knew him once a servant of the prince; I cannot tell, good sir, for
which of his virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of the
court.

CLOWN.
His vices, you would say; theres no virtue whipped out of the court.
They cherish it to make it stay there; and yet it will no more but
abide.

AUTOLYCUS.
Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well. He hath been since an
ape-bearer, then a process-server, a bailiff. Then he compassed a
motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinkers wife within a mile
where my land and living lies; and, having flown over many knavish
professions, he settled only in rogue. Some call him Autolycus.

CLOWN.
Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he haunts wakes, fairs, and
bear-baitings.

AUTOLYCUS.
Very true, sir; he, sir, he; thats the rogue that put me into this
apparel.

CLOWN.
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia. If you had but looked big and
spit at him, hed have run.

AUTOLYCUS.
I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter. I am false of heart that
way; and that he knew, I warrant him.

CLOWN.
How do you now?

AUTOLYCUS.
Sweet sir, much better than I was. I can stand and walk: I will even
take my leave of you and pace softly towards my kinsmans.

CLOWN.
Shall I bring thee on the way?

AUTOLYCUS.
No, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir.

CLOWN.
Then fare thee well. I must go buy spices for our sheep-shearing.

AUTOLYCUS.
Prosper you, sweet sir!

 [_Exit Clown._]

 Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice. Ill be with you
 at your sheep-shearing too. If I make not this cheat bring out
 another, and the shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled, and my name
 put in the book of virtue!
[_Sings._]
_Jog on, jog on, the footpath way,
    And merrily hent the stile-a:
A merry heart goes all the day,
    Your sad tires in a mile-a._

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. The same. A Shepherds Cottage.

 Enter Florizel and Perdita.

FLORIZEL.
These your unusual weeds to each part of you
Do give a life, no shepherdess, but Flora
Peering in Aprils front. This your sheep-shearing
Is as a meeting of the petty gods,
And you the queen on t.

PERDITA.
Sir, my gracious lord,
To chide at your extremes it not becomes me;
O, pardon that I name them! Your high self,
The gracious mark o th land, you have obscurd
With a swains wearing, and me, poor lowly maid,
Most goddess-like prankd up. But that our feasts
In every mess have folly, and the feeders
Digest it with a custom, I should blush
To see you so attird; swoon, I think,
To show myself a glass.

FLORIZEL.
I bless the time
When my good falcon made her flight across
Thy fathers ground.

PERDITA.
Now Jove afford you cause!
To me the difference forges dread. Your greatness
Hath not been usd to fear. Even now I tremble
To think your father, by some accident,
Should pass this way, as you did. O, the Fates!
How would he look to see his work, so noble,
Vilely bound up? What would he say? Or how
Should I, in these my borrowd flaunts, behold
The sternness of his presence?

FLORIZEL.
Apprehend
Nothing but jollity. The gods themselves,
Humbling their deities to love, have taken
The shapes of beasts upon them. Jupiter
Became a bull and bellowd; the green Neptune
A ram and bleated; and the fire-robd god,
Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,
As I seem now. Their transformations
Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,
Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires
Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts
Burn hotter than my faith.

PERDITA.
O, but, sir,
Your resolution cannot hold when tis
Opposd, as it must be, by the power of the king:
One of these two must be necessities,
Which then will speak, that you must change this purpose,
Or I my life.

FLORIZEL.
Thou dearest Perdita,
With these forcd thoughts, I prithee, darken not
The mirth o th feast. Or Ill be thine, my fair,
Or not my fathers. For I cannot be
Mine own, nor anything to any, if
I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle.
Strangle such thoughts as these with anything
That you behold the while. Your guests are coming:
Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
Of celebration of that nuptial which
We two have sworn shall come.

PERDITA.
O lady Fortune,
Stand you auspicious!

FLORIZEL.
See, your guests approach:
Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
And lets be red with mirth.

 Enter Shepherd with Polixenes and Camillo, disguised; Clown, Mopsa,
 Dorcas with others.

SHEPHERD.
Fie, daughter! When my old wife livd, upon
This day she was both pantler, butler, cook,
Both dame and servant; welcomd all; servd all;
Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here
At upper end o th table, now i th middle;
On his shoulder, and his; her face o fire
With labour, and the thing she took to quench it
She would to each one sip. You are retired,
As if you were a feasted one, and not
The hostess of the meeting: pray you, bid
These unknown friends to s welcome, for it is
A way to make us better friends, more known.
Come, quench your blushes, and present yourself
That which you are, mistress o th feast. Come on,
And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
As your good flock shall prosper.

PERDITA.
[_To Polixenes._] Sir, welcome.
It is my fathers will I should take on me
The hostess-ship o the day.
[_To Camillo._] Youre welcome, sir.
Give me those flowers there, Dorcas. Reverend sirs,
For you theres rosemary and rue; these keep
Seeming and savour all the winter long.
Grace and remembrance be to you both!
And welcome to our shearing!

POLIXENES.
Shepherdess
A fair one are youwell you fit our ages
With flowers of winter.

PERDITA.
Sir, the year growing ancient,
Not yet on summers death nor on the birth
Of trembling winter, the fairest flowers o th season
Are our carnations and streakd gillyvors,
Which some call natures bastards: of that kind
Our rustic gardens barren; and I care not
To get slips of them.

POLIXENES.
Wherefore, gentle maiden,
Do you neglect them?

PERDITA.
For I have heard it said
There is an art which, in their piedness, shares
With great creating nature.

POLIXENES.
Say there be;
Yet nature is made better by no mean
But nature makes that mean. So, over that art
Which you say adds to nature, is an art
That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry
A gentler scion to the wildest stock,
And make conceive a bark of baser kind
By bud of nobler race. This is an art
Which does mend nature, change it rather, but
The art itself is nature.

PERDITA.
So it is.

POLIXENES.
Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,
And do not call them bastards.

PERDITA.
Ill not put
The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;
No more than, were I painted, I would wish
This youth should say twere well, and only therefore
Desire to breed by me. Heres flowers for you:
Hot lavender, mints, savory, marjoram,
The marigold, that goes to bed with th sun
And with him rises weeping. These are flowers
Of middle summer, and I think they are given
To men of middle age. Youre very welcome.

CAMILLO.
I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
And only live by gazing.

PERDITA.
Out, alas!
Youd be so lean that blasts of January
Would blow you through and through. [_To Florizel_] Now, my fairst
friend,
I would I had some flowers o th spring, that might
Become your time of day; and yours, and yours,
That wear upon your virgin branches yet
Your maidenheads growing. O Proserpina,
From the flowers now that, frighted, thou letst fall
From Diss waggon! daffodils,
That come before the swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty; violets dim,
But sweeter than the lids of Junos eyes
Or Cythereas breath; pale primroses,
That die unmarried ere they can behold
Bright Phoebus in his strength (a malady
Most incident to maids); bold oxlips and
The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds,
The flower-de-luce being one. O, these I lack,
To make you garlands of; and my sweet friend,
To strew him oer and oer!

FLORIZEL.
What, like a corse?

PERDITA.
No, like a bank for love to lie and play on;
Not like a corse; or if, not to be buried,
But quick, and in mine arms. Come, take your flowers.
Methinks I play as I have seen them do
In Whitsun pastorals. Sure this robe of mine
Does change my disposition.

FLORIZEL.
What you do
Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet,
Id have you do it ever. When you sing,
Id have you buy and sell so, so give alms,
Pray so; and, for the ordring your affairs,
To sing them too. When you do dance, I wish you
A wave o th sea, that you might ever do
Nothing but that, move still, still so,
And own no other function. Each your doing,
So singular in each particular,
Crowns what you are doing in the present deeds,
That all your acts are queens.

PERDITA.
O Doricles,
Your praises are too large. But that your youth,
And the true blood which peeps fairly through t,
Do plainly give you out an unstained shepherd,
With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,
You wood me the false way.

FLORIZEL.
I think you have
As little skill to fear as I have purpose
To put you to t. But, come; our dance, I pray.
Your hand, my Perdita. So turtles pair
That never mean to part.

PERDITA.
Ill swear for em.

POLIXENES.
This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever
Ran on the green-sward. Nothing she does or seems
But smacks of something greater than herself,
Too noble for this place.

CAMILLO.
He tells her something
That makes her blood look out. Good sooth, she is
The queen of curds and cream.

CLOWN.
Come on, strike up.

DORCAS.
Mopsa must be your mistress: marry, garlic, to mend her kissing with!

MOPSA.
Now, in good time!

CLOWN.
Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.
Come, strike up.

 [_Music. Here a dance Of Shepherds and Shepherdesses._]

POLIXENES.
Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
Which dances with your daughter?

SHEPHERD.
They call him Doricles; and boasts himself
To have a worthy feeding. But I have it
Upon his own report, and I believe it.
He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter.
I think so too; for never gazd the moon
Upon the water as hell stand and read,
As twere, my daughters eyes. And, to be plain,
I think there is not half a kiss to choose
Who loves another best.

POLIXENES.
She dances featly.

SHEPHERD.
So she does anything, though I report it
That should be silent. If young Doricles
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
Which he not dreams of.

 Enter a Servant.

SERVANT.
O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the door, you would never
dance again after a tabor and pipe; no, the bagpipe could not move you.
He sings several tunes faster than youll tell money. He utters them as
he had eaten ballads, and all mens ears grew to his tunes.

CLOWN.
He could never come better: he shall come in. I love a ballad but even
too well, if it be doleful matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant
thing indeed and sung lamentably.

SERVANT.
He hath songs for man or woman of all sizes. No milliner can so fit his
customers with gloves. He has the prettiest love-songs for maids, so
without bawdry, which is strange; with such delicate burdens of dildos
and fadings, jump her and thump her; and where some stretch-mouthed
rascal would, as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into the
matter, he makes the maid to answer Whoop, do me no harm, good man;
puts him off, slights him, with Whoop, do me no harm, good man.

POLIXENES.
This is a brave fellow.

CLOWN.
Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited fellow. Has he any
unbraided wares?

SERVANT.
He hath ribbons of all the colours i th rainbow; points, more than
all the lawyers in Bohemia can learnedly handle, though they come to
him by th gross; inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns; why he sings em
over as they were gods or goddesses; you would think a smock were a
she-angel, he so chants to the sleeve-hand and the work about the
square on t.

CLOWN.
Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.

PERDITA.
Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in s tunes.

 [_Exit Servant._]

CLOWN.
You have of these pedlars that have more in them than youd think,
sister.

PERDITA.
Ay, good brother, or go about to think.

 Enter Autolycus, singing.

AUTOLYCUS.
_Lawn as white as driven snow,
Cypress black as eer was crow,
Gloves as sweet as damask roses,
Masks for faces and for noses,
Bugle-bracelet, necklace amber,
Perfume for a ladys chamber,
Golden quoifs and stomachers
For my lads to give their dears,
Pins and poking-sticks of steel,
What maids lack from head to heel.
Come buy of me, come; come buy, come buy;
Buy, lads, or else your lasses cry.
Come, buy._

CLOWN.
If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take no money of me;
but being enthralled as I am, it will also be the bondage of certain
ribbons and gloves.

MOPSA.
I was promised them against the feast; but they come not too late now.

DORCAS.
He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.

MOPSA.
He hath paid you all he promised you. Maybe he has paid you more, which
will shame you to give him again.

CLOWN.
Is there no manners left among maids? Will they wear their plackets
where they should bear their faces? Is there not milking-time, when you
are going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle of these secrets, but you
must be tittle-tattling before all our guests? Tis well they are
whispering. Clamour your tongues, and not a word more.

MOPSA.
I have done. Come, you promised me a tawdry lace and a pair of sweet
gloves.

CLOWN.
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way and lost all my
money?

AUTOLYCUS.
And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad; therefore it behoves men to
be wary.

CLOWN.
Fear not thou, man. Thou shalt lose nothing here.

AUTOLYCUS.
I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of charge.

CLOWN.
What hast here? Ballads?

MOPSA.
Pray now, buy some. I love a ballad in print alife, for then we are
sure they are true.

AUTOLYCUS.
Heres one to a very doleful tune. How a usurers wife was brought to
bed of twenty money-bags at a burden, and how she longed to eat adders
heads and toads carbonadoed.

MOPSA.
Is it true, think you?

AUTOLYCUS.
Very true, and but a month old.

DORCAS.
Bless me from marrying a usurer!

AUTOLYCUS.
Heres the midwifes name tot, one Mistress Taleporter, and five or
six honest wives that were present. Why should I carry lies abroad?

MOPSA.
Pray you now, buy it.

CLOWN.
Come on, lay it by; and lets first see more ballads. Well buy the
other things anon.

AUTOLYCUS.
Heres another ballad, of a fish that appeared upon the coast on
Wednesday the fourscore of April, forty thousand fathom above water,
and sung this ballad against the hard hearts of maids. It was thought
she was a woman, and was turned into a cold fish for she would not
exchange flesh with one that loved her. The ballad is very pitiful, and
as true.

DORCAS.
Is it true too, think you?

AUTOLYCUS.
Five justices hands at it, and witnesses more than my pack will hold.

CLOWN.
Lay it by too: another.

AUTOLYCUS.
This is a merry ballad; but a very pretty one.

MOPSA.
Lets have some merry ones.

AUTOLYCUS.
Why, this is a passing merry one and goes to the tune of Two maids
wooing a man. Theres scarce a maid westward but she sings it. Tis in
request, I can tell you.

MOPSA.
We can both sing it: if thoult bear a part, thou shalt hear; tis in
three parts.

DORCAS.
We had the tune on t a month ago.

AUTOLYCUS.
I can bear my part; you must know tis my occupation: have at it with
you.

SONG.

AUTOLYCUS.
_Get you hence, for I must go
Where it fits not you to know._

DORCAS.
_Whither?_

MOPSA.
_O, whither?_

DORCAS.
_Whither?_

MOPSA.
_It becomes thy oath full well
Thou to me thy secrets tell._

DORCAS.
_Me too! Let me go thither._

MOPSA.
Or thou goest to th grange or mill.

DORCAS.
_If to either, thou dost ill._

AUTOLYCUS.
_Neither._

DORCAS.
_What, neither?_

AUTOLYCUS.
_Neither._

DORCAS.
_Thou hast sworn my love to be._

MOPSA.
_Thou hast sworn it more to me.
Then whither goest? Say, whither?_

CLOWN.
Well have this song out anon by ourselves. My father and the gentlemen
are in sad talk, and well not trouble them. Come, bring away thy pack
after me. Wenches, Ill buy for you both. Pedlar, lets have the first
choice. Follow me, girls.

 [_Exit with Dorcas and Mopsa._]

AUTOLYCUS.
[_Aside._] And you shall pay well for em.

SONG.


    _Will you buy any tape,
    Or lace for your cape,
My dainty duck, my dear-a?
    Any silk, any thread,
    Any toys for your head,
Of the newst and finst, finst wear-a?
    Come to the pedlar;
    Moneys a meddler
That doth utter all mens ware-a._

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Servant.

SERVANT.
Master, there is three carters, three shepherds, three neat-herds,
three swine-herds, that have made themselves all men of hair. They call
themselves saltiers, and they have dance which the wenches say is a
gallimaufry of gambols, because they are not in t; but they themselves
are o the mind (if it be not too rough for some that know little but
bowling) it will please plentifully.

SHEPHERD.
Away! well none on t. Here has been too much homely foolery already.
I know, sir, we weary you.

POLIXENES.
You weary those that refresh us: pray, lets see these four threes of
herdsmen.

SERVANT.
One three of them, by their own report, sir, hath danced before the
king; and not the worst of the three but jumps twelve foot and a half
by th square.

SHEPHERD.
Leave your prating: since these good men are pleased, let them come in;
but quickly now.

SERVANT.
Why, they stay at door, sir.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Twelve Rustics, habited like Satyrs. They dance, and then
 exeunt.

POLIXENES.
O, father, youll know more of that hereafter.
[_To Camillo._] Is it not too far gone? Tis time to part them.
Hes simple and tells much. [_To Florizel._] How now, fair shepherd!
Your heart is full of something that does take
Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young
And handed love, as you do, I was wont
To load my she with knacks: I would have ransackd
The pedlars silken treasury and have pourd it
To her acceptance. You have let him go,
And nothing marted with him. If your lass
Interpretation should abuse, and call this
Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited
For a reply, at least if you make a care
Of happy holding her.

FLORIZEL.
Old sir, I know
She prizes not such trifles as these are:
The gifts she looks from me are packd and lockd
Up in my heart, which I have given already,
But not deliverd. O, hear me breathe my life
Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem,
Hath sometime lovd. I take thy hand! this hand,
As soft as doves down and as white as it,
Or Ethiopians tooth, or the fannd snow thats bolted
By th northern blasts twice oer.

POLIXENES.
What follows this?
How prettily the young swain seems to wash
The hand was fair before! I have put you out.
But to your protestation. Let me hear
What you profess.

FLORIZEL.
Do, and be witness to t.

POLIXENES.
And this my neighbour, too?

FLORIZEL.
And he, and more
Than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, and all:
That were I crownd the most imperial monarch,
Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
More than was ever mans, I would not prize them
Without her love; for her employ them all;
Commend them and condemn them to her service,
Or to their own perdition.

POLIXENES.
Fairly offerd.

CAMILLO.
This shows a sound affection.

SHEPHERD.
But my daughter,
Say you the like to him?

PERDITA.
I cannot speak
So well, nothing so well; no, nor mean better:
By th pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out
The purity of his.

SHEPHERD.
Take hands, a bargain!
And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness tot.
I give my daughter to him, and will make
Her portion equal his.

FLORIZEL.
O, that must be
I th virtue of your daughter: one being dead,
I shall have more than you can dream of yet;
Enough then for your wonder. But come on,
Contract us fore these witnesses.

SHEPHERD.
Come, your hand;
And, daughter, yours.

POLIXENES.
Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;
Have you a father?

FLORIZEL.
I have; but what of him?

POLIXENES.
Knows he of this?

FLORIZEL.
He neither does nor shall.

POLIXENES.
Methinks a father
Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
That best becomes the table. Pray you once more,
Is not your father grown incapable
Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid
With age and altring rheums? can he speak? hear?
Know man from man? dispute his own estate?
Lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing
But what he did being childish?

FLORIZEL.
No, good sir;
He has his health, and ampler strength indeed
Than most have of his age.

POLIXENES.
By my white beard,
You offer him, if this be so, a wrong
Something unfilial: reason my son
Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
The father, all whose joy is nothing else
But fair posterity, should hold some counsel
In such a business.

FLORIZEL.
I yield all this;
But for some other reasons, my grave sir,
Which tis not fit you know, I not acquaint
My father of this business.

POLIXENES.
Let him know t.

FLORIZEL.
He shall not.

POLIXENES.
Prithee let him.

FLORIZEL.
No, he must not.

SHEPHERD.
Let him, my son: he shall not need to grieve
At knowing of thy choice.

FLORIZEL.
Come, come, he must not.
Mark our contract.

POLIXENES.
[_Discovering himself._] Mark your divorce, young sir,
Whom son I dare not call; thou art too base
To be acknowledged: thou a sceptres heir,
That thus affects a sheep-hook! Thou, old traitor,
I am sorry that, by hanging thee, I can
But shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece
Of excellent witchcraft, whom of force must know
The royal fool thou copst with,

SHEPHERD.
O, my heart!

POLIXENES.
Ill have thy beauty scratchd with briers and made
More homely than thy state. For thee, fond boy,
If I may ever know thou dost but sigh
That thou no more shalt see this knack (as never
I mean thou shalt), well bar thee from succession;
Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
Far than Deucalion off. Mark thou my words.
Follow us to the court. Thou churl, for this time,
Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
From the dead blow of it. And you, enchantment,
Worthy enough a herdsman; yea, him too
That makes himself, but for our honour therein,
Unworthy thee. If ever henceforth thou
These rural latches to his entrance open,
Or hoop his body more with thy embraces,
I will devise a death as cruel for thee
As thou art tender to t.

 [_Exit._]

PERDITA.
Even here undone.
I was not much afeard, for once or twice
I was about to speak, and tell him plainly
The selfsame sun that shines upon his court
Hides not his visage from our cottage, but
Looks on alike. [_To Florizel._] Willt please you, sir, be gone?
I told you what would come of this. Beseech you,
Of your own state take care. This dream of mine
Being now awake, Ill queen it no inch farther,
But milk my ewes, and weep.

CAMILLO.
Why, how now, father!
Speak ere thou diest.

SHEPHERD.
I cannot speak, nor think,
Nor dare to know that which I know. O sir,
You have undone a man of fourscore three,
That thought to fill his grave in quiet; yea,
To die upon the bed my father died,
To lie close by his honest bones; but now
Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me
Where no priest shovels in dust. O cursed wretch,
That knewst this was the prince, and wouldst adventure
To mingle faith with him! Undone, undone!
If I might die within this hour, I have livd
To die when I desire.

 [_Exit._]

FLORIZEL.
Why look you so upon me?
I am but sorry, not afeard; delayd,
But nothing altred: what I was, I am:
More straining on for plucking back; not following
My leash unwillingly.

CAMILLO.
Gracious my lord,
You know your fathers temper: at this time
He will allow no speech (which I do guess
You do not purpose to him) and as hardly
Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear:
Then, till the fury of his highness settle,
Come not before him.

FLORIZEL.
I not purpose it.
I think Camillo?

CAMILLO.
Even he, my lord.

PERDITA.
How often have I told you twould be thus!
How often said my dignity would last
But till twere known!

FLORIZEL.
It cannot fail but by
The violation of my faith; and then
Let nature crush the sides o th earth together
And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks.
From my succession wipe me, father; I
Am heir to my affection.

CAMILLO.
Be advisd.

FLORIZEL.
I am, and by my fancy. If my reason
Will thereto be obedient, I have reason;
If not, my senses, better pleasd with madness,
Do bid it welcome.

CAMILLO.
This is desperate, sir.

FLORIZEL.
So call it: but it does fulfil my vow.
I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may
Be thereat gleand; for all the sun sees or
The close earth wombs, or the profound seas hides
In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath
To this my fair belovd. Therefore, I pray you,
As you have ever been my fathers honourd friend,
When he shall miss me,as, in faith, I mean not
To see him any more,cast your good counsels
Upon his passion: let myself and fortune
Tug for the time to come. This you may know,
And so deliver, I am put to sea
With her whom here I cannot hold on shore;
And, most opportune to her need, I have
A vessel rides fast by, but not prepard
For this design. What course I mean to hold
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
Concern me the reporting.

CAMILLO.
O my lord,
I would your spirit were easier for advice,
Or stronger for your need.

FLORIZEL.
Hark, Perdita. [_Takes her aside._]
[_To Camillo._] Ill hear you by and by.

CAMILLO.
Hes irremovable,
Resolvd for flight. Now were I happy if
His going I could frame to serve my turn,
Save him from danger, do him love and honour,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
And that unhappy king, my master, whom
I so much thirst to see.

FLORIZEL.
Now, good Camillo,
I am so fraught with curious business that
I leave out ceremony.

CAMILLO.
Sir, I think
You have heard of my poor services, i th love
That I have borne your father?

FLORIZEL.
Very nobly
Have you deservd: it is my fathers music
To speak your deeds, not little of his care
To have them recompensd as thought on.

CAMILLO.
Well, my lord,
If you may please to think I love the king,
And, through him, whats nearest to him, which is
Your gracious self, embrace but my direction,
If your more ponderous and settled project
May suffer alteration. On mine honour,
Ill point you where you shall have such receiving
As shall become your highness; where you may
Enjoy your mistress; from the whom, I see,
Theres no disjunction to be made, but by,
As heavens forfend, your ruin. Marry her,
And with my best endeavours in your absence
Your discontenting father strive to qualify
And bring him up to liking.

FLORIZEL.
How, Camillo,
May this, almost a miracle, be done?
That I may call thee something more than man,
And after that trust to thee.

CAMILLO.
Have you thought on
A place whereto youll go?

FLORIZEL.
Not any yet.
But as th unthought-on accident is guilty
To what we wildly do, so we profess
Ourselves to be the slaves of chance, and flies
Of every wind that blows.

CAMILLO.
Then list to me:
This follows, if you will not change your purpose,
But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia,
And there present yourself and your fair princess,
For so, I see, she must be, fore Leontes:
She shall be habited as it becomes
The partner of your bed. Methinks I see
Leontes opening his free arms and weeping
His welcomes forth; asks thee, the son, forgiveness,
As twere i th fathers person; kisses the hands
Of your fresh princess; oer and oer divides him
Twixt his unkindness and his kindness. Th one
He chides to hell, and bids the other grow
Faster than thought or time.

FLORIZEL.
Worthy Camillo,
What colour for my visitation shall I
Hold up before him?

CAMILLO.
Sent by the king your father
To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir,
The manner of your bearing towards him, with
What you (as from your father) shall deliver,
Things known betwixt us three, Ill write you down,
The which shall point you forth at every sitting
What you must say; that he shall not perceive
But that you have your fathers bosom there
And speak his very heart.

FLORIZEL.
I am bound to you:
There is some sap in this.

CAMILLO.
A course more promising
Than a wild dedication of yourselves
To unpathd waters, undreamd shores, most certain
To miseries enough: no hope to help you,
But as you shake off one to take another:
Nothing so certain as your anchors, who
Do their best office if they can but stay you
Where youll be loath to be. Besides, you know
Prosperitys the very bond of love,
Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
Affliction alters.

PERDITA.
One of these is true:
I think affliction may subdue the cheek,
But not take in the mind.

CAMILLO.
Yea, say you so?
There shall not at your fathers house, these seven years
Be born another such.

FLORIZEL.
My good Camillo,
She is as forward of her breeding as
She is i th rear our birth.

CAMILLO.
I cannot say tis pity
She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress
To most that teach.

PERDITA.
Your pardon, sir; for this
Ill blush you thanks.

FLORIZEL.
My prettiest Perdita!
But, O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo,
Preserver of my father, now of me,
The medicine of our house, how shall we do?
We are not furnishd like Bohemias son,
Nor shall appear in Sicilia.

CAMILLO.
My lord,
Fear none of this. I think you know my fortunes
Do all lie there: it shall be so my care
To have you royally appointed as if
The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir,
That you may know you shall not want,one word.
[_They talk aside._]

 Enter Autolycus.

AUTOLYCUS.
Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his sworn brother, a very
simple gentleman! I have sold all my trumpery. Not a counterfeit stone,
not a ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book, ballad, knife, tape,
glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring, to keep my pack from fasting.
They throng who should buy first, as if my trinkets had been hallowed
and brought a benediction to the buyer: by which means I saw whose
purse was best in picture; and what I saw, to my good use I remembered.
My clown (who wants but something to be a reasonable man) grew so in
love with the wenches song that he would not stir his pettitoes till
he had both tune and words; which so drew the rest of the herd to me
that all their other senses stuck in ears: you might have pinched a
placket, it was senseless; twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a purse;
I would have filed keys off that hung in chains: no hearing, no
feeling, but my sirs song, and admiring the nothing of it. So that in
this time of lethargy I picked and cut most of their festival purses;
and had not the old man come in with a whoobub against his daughter and
the kings son, and scared my choughs from the chaff, I had not left a
purse alive in the whole army.

 Camillo, Florizel and Perdita come forward.

CAMILLO.
Nay, but my letters, by this means being there
So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.

FLORIZEL.
And those that youll procure from king Leontes?

CAMILLO.
Shall satisfy your father.

PERDITA.
Happy be you!
All that you speak shows fair.

CAMILLO.
[_Seeing Autolycus._] Who have we here?
Well make an instrument of this; omit
Nothing may give us aid.

AUTOLYCUS.
[_Aside._] If they have overheard me now,why, hanging.

CAMILLO.
How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? Fear not, man; heres no
harm intended to thee.

AUTOLYCUS.
I am a poor fellow, sir.

CAMILLO.
Why, be so still; heres nobody will steal that from thee: yet, for the
outside of thy poverty we must make an exchange; therefore discase thee
instantly,thou must think theres a necessity intand change garments
with this gentleman: though the pennyworth on his side be the worst,
yet hold thee, theres some boot.

 [_Giving money._]

AUTOLYCUS.
I am a poor fellow, sir: [_Aside._] I know ye well enough.

CAMILLO.
Nay, prithee dispatch: the gentleman is half flayed already.

AUTOLYCUS.
Are you in earnest, sir? [_Aside._] I smell the trick ont.

FLORIZEL.
Dispatch, I prithee.

AUTOLYCUS.
Indeed, I have had earnest; but I cannot with conscience take it.

CAMILLO.
Unbuckle, unbuckle.

 [_Florizel and Autolycus exchange garments._]

Fortunate mistress,let my prophecy
Come home to you!you must retire yourself
Into some covert. Take your sweethearts hat
And pluck it oer your brows, muffle your face,
Dismantle you; and, as you can, disliken
The truth of your own seeming; that you may
(For I do fear eyes over) to shipboard
Get undescried.

PERDITA.
I see the play so lies
That I must bear a part.

CAMILLO.
No remedy.
Have you done there?

FLORIZEL.
Should I now meet my father,
He would not call me son.

CAMILLO.
Nay, you shall have no hat. [_Giving it to Perdita._]
Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.

AUTOLYCUS.
Adieu, sir.

FLORIZEL.
O Perdita, what have we twain forgot?
Pray you a word.

 [_They converse apart._]

CAMILLO.
[_Aside._] What I do next, shall be to tell the king
Of this escape, and whither they are bound;
Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail
To force him after: in whose company
I shall re-view Sicilia; for whose sight
I have a womans longing.

FLORIZEL.
Fortune speed us!
Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.

CAMILLO.
The swifter speed the better.

 [_Exeunt Florizel, Perdita and Camillo._]

AUTOLYCUS.
I understand the business, I hear it. To have an open ear, a quick eye,
and a nimble hand, is necessary for a cut-purse; a good nose is
requisite also, to smell out work for the other senses. I see this is
the time that the unjust man doth thrive. What an exchange had this
been without boot! What a boot is here with this exchange! Sure the
gods do this year connive at us, and we may do anything extempore. The
prince himself is about a piece of iniquity, stealing away from his
father with his clog at his heels: if I thought it were a piece of
honesty to acquaint the king withal, I would not dot: I hold it the
more knavery to conceal it; and therein am I constant to my profession.

 Enter Clown and Shepherd.

Aside, aside; here is more matter for a hot brain: every lanes end,
every shop, church, session, hanging, yields a careful man work.

CLOWN.
See, see; what a man you are now! There is no other way but to tell the
king shes a changeling, and none of your flesh and blood.

SHEPHERD.
Nay, but hear me.

CLOWN.
Nay, but hear me.

SHEPHERD.
Go to, then.

CLOWN.
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh and blood has not
offended the king; and so your flesh and blood is not to be punished by
him. Show those things you found about her, those secret things, all
but what she has with her: this being done, let the law go whistle, I
warrant you.

SHEPHERD.
I will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his sons pranks too;
who, I may say, is no honest man neither to his father nor to me, to go
about to make me the kings brother-in-law.

CLOWN.
Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you could have been to him,
and then your blood had been the dearer by I know how much an ounce.

AUTOLYCUS.
[_Aside._] Very wisely, puppies!

SHEPHERD.
Well, let us to the king: there is that in this fardel will make him
scratch his beard.

AUTOLYCUS.
[_Aside._] I know not what impediment this complaint may be to the
flight of my master.

CLOWN.
Pray heartily he be at palace.

AUTOLYCUS.
[_Aside._] Though I am not naturally honest, I am so sometimes by
chance. Let me pocket up my pedlars excrement. [_Takes off his false
beard._] How now, rustics! whither are you bound?

SHEPHERD.
To the palace, an it like your worship.

AUTOLYCUS.
Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition of that fardel, the
place of your dwelling, your names, your ages, of what having,
breeding, and anything that is fitting to be known? discover!

CLOWN.
We are but plain fellows, sir.

AUTOLYCUS.
A lie; you are rough and hairy. Let me have no lying. It becomes none
but tradesmen, and they often give us soldiers the lie; but we pay them
for it with stamped coin, not stabbing steel; therefore they do not
give us the lie.

CLOWN.
Your worship had like to have given us one, if you had not taken
yourself with the manner.

SHEPHERD.
Are you a courtier, an t like you, sir?

AUTOLYCUS.
Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest thou not the air of
the court in these enfoldings? hath not my gait in it the measure of
the court? receives not thy nose court-odour from me? reflect I not on
thy baseness court-contempt? Thinkst thou, for that I insinuate, or
toaze from thee thy business, I am therefore no courtier? I am courtier
_cap-a-pe_, and one that will either push on or pluck back thy business
there. Whereupon I command thee to open thy affair.

SHEPHERD.
My business, sir, is to the king.

AUTOLYCUS.
What advocate hast thou to him?

SHEPHERD.
I know not, an t like you.

CLOWN.
Advocates the court-word for a pheasant. Say you have none.

SHEPHERD.
None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.

AUTOLYCUS.
How blessd are we that are not simple men!
Yet nature might have made me as these are,
Therefore I will not disdain.

CLOWN.
This cannot be but a great courtier.

SHEPHERD.
His garments are rich, but he wears them not handsomely.

CLOWN.
He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical: a great man, Ill
warrant; I know by the picking ons teeth.

AUTOLYCUS.
The fardel there? Whats i th fardel? Wherefore that box?

SHEPHERD.
Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box which none must
know but the king; and which he shall know within this hour, if I may
come to th speech of him.

AUTOLYCUS.
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.

SHEPHERD.
Why, sir?

AUTOLYCUS.
The king is not at the palace; he is gone aboard a new ship to purge
melancholy and air himself: for, if thou beest capable of things
serious, thou must know the king is full of grief.

SHEPHERD.
So tis said, sir; about his son, that should have married a shepherds
daughter.

AUTOLYCUS.
If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly. The curses he shall
have, the tortures he shall feel, will break the back of man, the heart
of monster.

CLOWN.
Think you so, sir?

AUTOLYCUS.
Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy and vengeance bitter;
but those that are germane to him, though removed fifty times, shall
all come under the hangman: which, though it be great pity, yet it is
necessary. An old sheep-whistling rogue, a ram-tender, to offer to have
his daughter come into grace! Some say he shall be stoned; but that
death is too soft for him, say I. Draw our throne into a sheepcote! All
deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.

CLOWN.
Has the old man eer a son, sir, do you hear, an t like you, sir?

AUTOLYCUS.
He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; then nointed over with honey,
set on the head of a wasps nest; then stand till he be three quarters
and a dram dead; then recovered again with aqua-vit or some other hot
infusion; then, raw as he is, and in the hottest day prognostication
proclaims, shall he be set against a brick wall, the sun looking with a
southward eye upon him, where he is to behold him with flies blown to
death. But what talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries are
to be smiled at, their offences being so capital? Tell me (for you seem
to be honest plain men) what you have to the king. Being something
gently considered, Ill bring you where he is aboard, tender your
persons to his presence, whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be in
man besides the king to effect your suits, here is man shall do it.

CLOWN.
He seems to be of great authority: close with him, give him gold; and
though authority be a stubborn bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with
gold: show the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand, and no
more ado. Remember: stond and flayed alive.

SHEPHERD.
An t please you, sir, to undertake the business for us, here is that
gold I have. Ill make it as much more, and leave this young man in
pawn till I bring it you.

AUTOLYCUS.
After I have done what I promised?

SHEPHERD.
Ay, sir.

AUTOLYCUS.
Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this business?

CLOWN.
In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitiful one, I hope I shall
not be flayed out of it.

AUTOLYCUS.
O, thats the case of the shepherds son. Hang him, hell be made an
example.

CLOWN.
Comfort, good comfort! We must to the king and show our strange sights.
He must know tis none of your daughter nor my sister; we are gone
else. Sir, I will give you as much as this old man does when the
business is performed, and remain, as he says, your pawn till it be
brought you.

AUTOLYCUS.
I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side; go on the
right-hand. I will but look upon the hedge, and follow you.

CLOWN.
We are blessed in this man, as I may say, even blessed.

SHEPHERD.
Lets before, as he bids us. He was provided to do us good.

 [_Exeunt Shepherd and Clown._]

AUTOLYCUS.
If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would not suffer me: she
drops booties in my mouth. I am courted now with a double occasion:
gold, and a means to do the prince my master good; which who knows how
that may turn back to my advancement? I will bring these two moles,
these blind ones, aboard him. If he think it fit to shore them again
and that the complaint they have to the king concerns him nothing, let
him call me rogue for being so far officious; for I am proof against
that title and what shame else belongs to t. To him will I present
them. There may be matter in it.

 [_Exit._]



ACT V

SCENE I. Sicilia. A Room in the palace of Leontes.

 Enter Leontes, Cleomenes, Dion, Paulina and others.

CLEOMENES
Sir, you have done enough, and have performd
A saint-like sorrow: no fault could you make
Which you have not redeemd; indeed, paid down
More penitence than done trespass: at the last,
Do as the heavens have done, forget your evil;
With them, forgive yourself.

LEONTES.
Whilst I remember
Her and her virtues, I cannot forget
My blemishes in them; and so still think of
The wrong I did myself: which was so much
That heirless it hath made my kingdom, and
Destroyd the sweetst companion that eer man
Bred his hopes out of.

PAULINA.
True, too true, my lord.
If, one by one, you wedded all the world,
Or from the all that are took something good,
To make a perfect woman, she you killd
Would be unparalleld.

LEONTES.
I think so. Killd!
She I killd! I did so: but thou strikst me
Sorely, to say I did: it is as bitter
Upon thy tongue as in my thought. Now, good now,
Say so but seldom.

CLEOMENES
Not at all, good lady.
You might have spoken a thousand things that would
Have done the time more benefit and gracd
Your kindness better.

PAULINA.
You are one of those
Would have him wed again.

DION.
If you would not so,
You pity not the state, nor the remembrance
Of his most sovereign name; consider little
What dangers, by his highness fail of issue,
May drop upon his kingdom, and devour
Incertain lookers-on. What were more holy
Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
What holier than, for royaltys repair,
For present comfort, and for future good,
To bless the bed of majesty again
With a sweet fellow to t?

PAULINA.
There is none worthy,
Respecting her thats gone. Besides, the gods
Will have fulfilld their secret purposes;
For has not the divine Apollo said,
Is t not the tenor of his oracle,
That king Leontes shall not have an heir
Till his lost child be found? Which that it shall,
Is all as monstrous to our human reason
As my Antigonus to break his grave
And come again to me; who, on my life,
Did perish with the infant. Tis your counsel
My lord should to the heavens be contrary,
Oppose against their wills. [_To Leontes._] Care not for issue;
The crown will find an heir. Great Alexander
Left his to th worthiest; so his successor
Was like to be the best.

LEONTES.
Good Paulina,
Who hast the memory of Hermione,
I know, in honour, O that ever I
Had squard me to thy counsel! Then, even now,
I might have lookd upon my queens full eyes,
Have taken treasure from her lips,

PAULINA.
And left them
More rich for what they yielded.

LEONTES.
Thou speakst truth.
No more such wives; therefore, no wife: one worse,
And better usd, would make her sainted spirit
Again possess her corpse, and on this stage,
(Where we offenders now appear) soul-vexed,
And begin Why to me?

PAULINA.
Had she such power,
She had just cause.

LEONTES.
She had; and would incense me
To murder her I married.

PAULINA.
I should so.
Were I the ghost that walkd, Id bid you mark
Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in t
You chose her: then Id shriek, that even your ears
Should rift to hear me; and the words that followd
Should be Remember mine.

LEONTES.
Stars, stars,
And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;
Ill have no wife, Paulina.

PAULINA.
Will you swear
Never to marry but by my free leave?

LEONTES.
Never, Paulina; so be blessd my spirit!

PAULINA.
Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.

CLEOMENES
You tempt him over-much.

PAULINA.
Unless another,
As like Hermione as is her picture,
Affront his eye.

CLEOMENES
Good madam,

PAULINA.
I have done.
Yet, if my lord will marry,if you will, sir,
No remedy but you will,give me the office
To choose you a queen: she shall not be so young
As was your former, but she shall be such
As, walkd your first queens ghost, it should take joy
To see her in your arms.

LEONTES.
My true Paulina,
We shall not marry till thou bidst us.

PAULINA.
That
Shall be when your first queens again in breath;
Never till then.

 Enter a Servant.

SERVANT.
One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,
Son of Polixenes, with his princess (she
The fairest I have yet beheld) desires access
To your high presence.

LEONTES.
What with him? he comes not
Like to his fathers greatness: his approach,
So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us
Tis not a visitation framd, but forcd
By need and accident. What train?

SERVANT.
But few,
And those but mean.

LEONTES.
His princess, say you, with him?

SERVANT.
Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
That eer the sun shone bright on.

PAULINA.
O Hermione,
As every present time doth boast itself
Above a better gone, so must thy grave
Give way to whats seen now! Sir, you yourself
Have said and writ so,but your writing now
Is colder than that theme,She had not been,
Nor was not to be equalld; thus your verse
Flowd with her beauty once; tis shrewdly ebbd,
To say you have seen a better.

SERVANT.
Pardon, madam:
The one I have almost forgot,your pardon;
The other, when she has obtaind your eye,
Will have your tongue too. This is a creature,
Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal
Of all professors else; make proselytes
Of who she but bid follow.

PAULINA.
How! not women?

SERVANT.
Women will love her that she is a woman
More worth than any man; men, that she is
The rarest of all women.

LEONTES.
Go, Cleomenes;
Yourself, assisted with your honourd friends,
Bring them to our embracement.

 [_Exeunt Cleomenes and others._]

Still, tis strange
He thus should steal upon us.

PAULINA.
Had our prince,
Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had paird
Well with this lord. There was not full a month
Between their births.

LEONTES.
Prithee no more; cease; Thou knowst
He dies to me again when talkd of: sure,
When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches
Will bring me to consider that which may
Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.

 Enter Florizel, Perdita, Cleomenes and others.

Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince;
For she did print your royal father off,
Conceiving you. Were I but twenty-one,
Your fathers image is so hit in you,
His very air, that I should call you brother,
As I did him, and speak of something wildly
By us performd before. Most dearly welcome!
And your fair princess,goddess! O, alas!
I lost a couple that twixt heaven and earth
Might thus have stood, begetting wonder, as
You, gracious couple, do! And then I lost,
All mine own folly,the society,
Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
Though bearing misery, I desire my life
Once more to look on him.

FLORIZEL.
By his command
Have I here touchd Sicilia, and from him
Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,
Can send his brother: and, but infirmity,
Which waits upon worn times, hath something seizd
His wishd ability, he had himself
The lands and waters twixt your throne and his
Measurd, to look upon you; whom he loves,
He bade me say so,more than all the sceptres
And those that bear them living.

LEONTES.
O my brother,
Good gentleman!the wrongs I have done thee stir
Afresh within me; and these thy offices,
So rarely kind, are as interpreters
Of my behind-hand slackness! Welcome hither,
As is the spring to the earth. And hath he too
Exposd this paragon to the fearful usage,
At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,
To greet a man not worth her pains, much less
Th adventure of her person?

FLORIZEL.
Good, my lord,
She came from Libya.

LEONTES.
Where the warlike Smalus,
That noble honourd lord, is feard and lovd?

FLORIZEL.
Most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose daughter
His tears proclaimd his, parting with her: thence,
A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have crossd,
To execute the charge my father gave me
For visiting your highness: my best train
I have from your Sicilian shores dismissd;
Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
Not only my success in Libya, sir,
But my arrival, and my wifes, in safety
Here, where we are.

LEONTES.
The blessed gods
Purge all infection from our air whilst you
Do climate here! You have a holy father,
A graceful gentleman; against whose person,
So sacred as it is, I have done sin,
For which the heavens, taking angry note,
Have left me issueless. And your fathers blessd,
As he from heaven merits it, with you,
Worthy his goodness. What might I have been,
Might I a son and daughter now have lookd on,
Such goodly things as you!

 Enter a Lord.

LORD.
Most noble sir,
That which I shall report will bear no credit,
Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir,
Bohemia greets you from himself by me;
Desires you to attach his son, who has
His dignity and duty both cast off
Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with
A shepherds daughter.

LEONTES.
Wheres Bohemia? speak.

LORD.
Here in your city; I now came from him.
I speak amazedly, and it becomes
My marvel and my message. To your court
Whiles he was hastningin the chase, it seems,
Of this fair couplemeets he on the way
The father of this seeming lady and
Her brother, having both their country quitted
With this young prince.

FLORIZEL.
Camillo has betrayd me;
Whose honour and whose honesty till now,
Endurd all weathers.

LORD.
Lay t so to his charge.
Hes with the king your father.

LEONTES.
Who? Camillo?

LORD.
Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now
Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth;
Forswear themselves as often as they speak.
Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them
With divers deaths in death.

PERDITA.
O my poor father!
The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have
Our contract celebrated.

LEONTES.
You are married?

FLORIZEL.
We are not, sir, nor are we like to be.
The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first.
The odds for high and lows alike.

LEONTES.
My lord,
Is this the daughter of a king?

FLORIZEL.
She is,
When once she is my wife.

LEONTES.
That once, I see by your good fathers speed,
Will come on very slowly. I am sorry,
Most sorry, you have broken from his liking,
Where you were tied in duty; and as sorry
Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,
That you might well enjoy her.

FLORIZEL.
Dear, look up:
Though Fortune, visible an enemy,
Should chase us with my father, power no jot
Hath she to change our loves. Beseech you, sir,
Remember since you owd no more to time
Than I do now: with thought of such affections,
Step forth mine advocate. At your request
My father will grant precious things as trifles.

LEONTES.
Would he do so, Id beg your precious mistress,
Which he counts but a trifle.

PAULINA.
Sir, my liege,
Your eye hath too much youth in t: not a month
Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes
Than what you look on now.

LEONTES.
I thought of her
Even in these looks I made. [_To Florizel._] But your petition
Is yet unanswerd. I will to your father.
Your honour not oerthrown by your desires,
I am friend to them and you: upon which errand
I now go toward him; therefore follow me,
And mark what way I make. Come, good my lord.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. Before the Palace.

 Enter Autolycus and a Gentleman.

AUTOLYCUS.
Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the old shepherd deliver
the manner how he found it: whereupon, after a little amazedness, we
were all commanded out of the chamber; only this, methought I heard the
shepherd say he found the child.

AUTOLYCUS.
I would most gladly know the issue of it.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
I make a broken delivery of the business; but the changes I perceived
in the king and Camillo were very notes of admiration. They seemed
almost, with staring on one another, to tear the cases of their eyes.
There was speech in their dumbness, language in their very gesture;
they looked as they had heard of a world ransomed, or one destroyed. A
notable passion of wonder appeared in them; but the wisest beholder,
that knew no more but seeing could not say if th importance were joy
or sorrow; but in the extremity of the one, it must needs be. Here
comes a gentleman that happily knows more.

 Enter a Gentleman.

The news, Rogero?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled: the kings daughter is
found: such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour that
ballad-makers cannot be able to express it. Here comes the Lady
Paulinas steward: he can deliver you more.

 Enter a third Gentleman.

 How goes it now, sir? This news, which is called true, is so like an
 old tale that the verity of it is in strong suspicion. Has the king
 found his heir?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
Most true, if ever truth were pregnant by circumstance. That which you
hear youll swear you see, there is such unity in the proofs. The
mantle of Queen Hermiones, her jewel about the neck of it, the letters
of Antigonus found with it, which they know to be his character; the
majesty of the creature in resemblance of the mother, the affection of
nobleness which nature shows above her breeding, and many other
evidences proclaim her with all certainty to be the kings daughter.
Did you see the meeting of the two kings?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
No.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
Then you have lost a sight which was to be seen, cannot be spoken of.
There might you have beheld one joy crown another, so and in such
manner that it seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their joy
waded in tears. There was casting up of eyes, holding up of hands, with
countenance of such distraction that they were to be known by garment,
not by favour. Our king, being ready to leap out of himself for joy of
his found daughter, as if that joy were now become a loss, cries O,
thy mother, thy mother! then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then embraces
his son-in-law; then again worries he his daughter with clipping her;
now he thanks the old shepherd, which stands by like a weather-bitten
conduit of many kings reigns. I never heard of such another encounter,
which lames report to follow it, and undoes description to do it.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried hence the child?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
Like an old tale still, which will have matter to rehearse, though
credit be asleep and not an ear open. He was torn to pieces with a
bear: this avouches the shepherds son, who has not only his innocence,
which seems much, to justify him, but a handkerchief and rings of his
that Paulina knows.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
What became of his bark and his followers?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
Wrecked the same instant of their masters death, and in the view of
the shepherd: so that all the instruments which aided to expose the
child were even then lost when it was found. But O, the noble combat
that twixt joy and sorrow was fought in Paulina! She had one eye
declined for the loss of her husband, another elevated that the oracle
was fulfilled. She lifted the princess from the earth, and so locks her
in embracing, as if she would pin her to her heart, that she might no
more be in danger of losing.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
The dignity of this act was worth the audience of kings and princes;
for by such was it acted.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
One of the prettiest touches of all, and that which angled for mine
eyes (caught the water, though not the fish) was, when at the relation
of the queens death (with the manner how she came to it bravely
confessed and lamented by the king) how attentiveness wounded his
daughter; till, from one sign of dolour to another, she did, with an
Alas, I would fain say, bleed tears, for I am sure my heart wept
blood. Who was most marble there changed colour; some swooned, all
sorrowed: if all the world could have seen it, the woe had been
universal.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Are they returned to the court?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
No: the princess hearing of her mothers statue, which is in the
keeping of Paulina,a piece many years in doing and now newly performed
by that rare Italian master, Julio Romano, who, had he himself
eternity, and could put breath into his work, would beguile Nature of
her custom, so perfectly he is her ape: he so near to Hermione hath
done Hermione that they say one would speak to her and stand in hope of
answer. Thither with all greediness of affection are they gone, and
there they intend to sup.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I thought she had some great matter there in hand; for she hath
privately twice or thrice a day, ever since the death of Hermione,
visited that removed house. Shall we thither, and with our company
piece the rejoicing?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Who would be thence that has the benefit of access? Every wink of an
eye some new grace will be born. Our absence makes us unthrifty to our
knowledge. Lets along.

 [_Exeunt Gentlemen._]

AUTOLYCUS.
Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me, would preferment drop
on my head. I brought the old man and his son aboard the prince; told
him I heard them talk of a fardel and I know not what. But he at that
time over-fond of the shepherds daughter (so he then took her to be),
who began to be much sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of
weather continuing, this mystery remained undiscoverd. But tis all
one to me; for had I been the finder-out of this secret, it would not
have relishd among my other discredits.

 Enter Shepherd and Clown.

Here come those I have done good to against my will, and already
appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.

SHEPHERD.
Come, boy; I am past more children, but thy sons and daughters will be
all gentlemen born.

CLOWN.
You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me this other day,
because I was no gentleman born. See you these clothes? Say you see
them not and think me still no gentleman born: you were best say these
robes are not gentlemen born. Give me the lie, do; and try whether I am
not now a gentleman born.

AUTOLYCUS.
I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.

CLOWN.
Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.

SHEPHERD.
And so have I, boy!

CLOWN.
So you have: but I was a gentleman born before my father; for the
kings son took me by the hand and called me brother; and then the two
kings called my father brother; and then the prince, my brother, and
the princess, my sister, called my father father; and so we wept; and
there was the first gentleman-like tears that ever we shed.

SHEPHERD.
We may live, son, to shed many more.

CLOWN.
Ay; or else twere hard luck, being in so preposterous estate as we
are.

AUTOLYCUS.
I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the faults I have committed
to your worship, and to give me your good report to the prince my
master.

SHEPHERD.
Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are gentlemen.

CLOWN.
Thou wilt amend thy life?

AUTOLYCUS.
Ay, an it like your good worship.

CLOWN.
Give me thy hand: I will swear to the prince thou art as honest a true
fellow as any is in Bohemia.

SHEPHERD.
You may say it, but not swear it.

CLOWN.
Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and franklins say it,
Ill swear it.

SHEPHERD.
How if it be false, son?

CLOWN.
If it be neer so false, a true gentleman may swear it in the behalf of
his friend. And Ill swear to the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy
hands and that thou wilt not be drunk; but I know thou art no tall
fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be drunk: but Ill swear it; and
I would thou wouldst be a tall fellow of thy hands.

AUTOLYCUS.
I will prove so, sir, to my power.

CLOWN.
Ay, by any means, prove a tall fellow: if I do not wonder how thou
darst venture to be drunk, not being a tall fellow, trust me not.
Hark! the kings and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the
queens picture. Come, follow us: well be thy good masters.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. A Room in Paulinas house.

 Enter Leontes, Polixenes, Florizel, Perdita, Camillo, Paulina, Lords
 and Attendants.

LEONTES.
O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
That I have had of thee!

PAULINA.
What, sovereign sir,
I did not well, I meant well. All my services
You have paid home: but that you have vouchsafd,
With your crownd brother and these your contracted
Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,
It is a surplus of your grace which never
My life may last to answer.

LEONTES.
O Paulina,
We honour you with trouble. But we came
To see the statue of our queen: your gallery
Have we passd through, not without much content
In many singularities; but we saw not
That which my daughter came to look upon,
The statue of her mother.

PAULINA.
As she livd peerless,
So her dead likeness, I do well believe,
Excels whatever yet you lookd upon
Or hand of man hath done; therefore I keep it
Lonely, apart. But here it is: prepare
To see the life as lively mockd as ever
Still sleep mockd death. Behold, and say tis well.

 Paulina undraws a curtain, and discovers Hermione standing as a
 statue.

I like your silence, it the more shows off
Your wonder: but yet speak. First you, my liege.
Comes it not something near?

LEONTES.
Her natural posture!
Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed
Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she
In thy not chiding; for she was as tender
As infancy and grace. But yet, Paulina,
Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
So aged as this seems.

POLIXENES.
O, not by much!

PAULINA.
So much the more our carvers excellence,
Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her
As she livd now.

LEONTES.
As now she might have done,
So much to my good comfort as it is
Now piercing to my soul. O, thus she stood,
Even with such life of majesty, warm life,
As now it coldly stands, when first I wood her!
I am ashamd: does not the stone rebuke me
For being more stone than it? O royal piece,
Theres magic in thy majesty, which has
My evils conjurd to remembrance and
From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,
Standing like stone with thee.

PERDITA.
And give me leave,
And do not say tis superstition, that
I kneel, and then implore her blessing. Lady,
Dear queen, that ended when I but began,
Give me that hand of yours to kiss.

PAULINA.
O, patience!
The statue is but newly fixd, the colours
Not dry.

CAMILLO.
My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,
Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,
So many summers dry. Scarce any joy
Did ever so long live; no sorrow
But killd itself much sooner.

POLIXENES.
Dear my brother,
Let him that was the cause of this have power
To take off so much grief from you as he
Will piece up in himself.

PAULINA.
Indeed, my lord,
If I had thought the sight of my poor image
Would thus have wrought youfor the stone is mine
Id not have showd it.

LEONTES.
Do not draw the curtain.

PAULINA.
No longer shall you gaze ont, lest your fancy
May think anon it moves.

LEONTES.
Let be, let be.
Would I were dead, but that methinks already
What was he that did make it? See, my lord,
Would you not deem it breathd? And that those veins
Did verily bear blood?

POLIXENES.
Masterly done:
The very life seems warm upon her lip.

LEONTES.
The fixture of her eye has motion in t,
As we are mockd with art.

PAULINA.
Ill draw the curtain:
My lords almost so far transported that
Hell think anon it lives.

LEONTES.
O sweet Paulina,
Make me to think so twenty years together!
No settled senses of the world can match
The pleasure of that madness. Let t alone.

PAULINA.
I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirrd you: but
I could afflict you further.

LEONTES.
Do, Paulina;
For this affliction has a taste as sweet
As any cordial comfort. Still methinks
There is an air comes from her. What fine chisel
Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
For I will kiss her!

PAULINA.
Good my lord, forbear:
The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;
Youll mar it if you kiss it, stain your own
With oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?

LEONTES.
No, not these twenty years.

PERDITA.
So long could I
Stand by, a looker on.

PAULINA.
Either forbear,
Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
For more amazement. If you can behold it,
Ill make the statue move indeed, descend,
And take you by the hand. But then youll think
(Which I protest against) I am assisted
By wicked powers.

LEONTES.
What you can make her do
I am content to look on: what to speak,
I am content to hear; for tis as easy
To make her speak as move.

PAULINA.
It is requird
You do awake your faith. Then all stand still;
Or those that think it is unlawful business
I am about, let them depart.

LEONTES.
Proceed:
No foot shall stir.

PAULINA.
Music, awake her: strike! [_Music._]
Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach;
Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come;
Ill fill your grave up: stir; nay, come away.
Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him
Dear life redeems you. You perceive she stirs.

 Hermione comes down from the pedestal.

Start not; her actions shall be holy as
You hear my spell is lawful. Do not shun her
Until you see her die again; for then
You kill her double. Nay, present your hand:
When she was young you wood her; now in age
Is she become the suitor?

LEONTES.
[_Embracing her._] O, shes warm!
If this be magic, let it be an art
Lawful as eating.

POLIXENES.
She embraces him.

CAMILLO.
She hangs about his neck.
If she pertain to life, let her speak too.

POLIXENES.
Ay, and make it manifest where she has livd,
Or how stoln from the dead.

PAULINA.
That she is living,
Were it but told you, should be hooted at
Like an old tale; but it appears she lives,
Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.
Please you to interpose, fair madam. Kneel
And pray your mothers blessing. Turn, good lady,
Our Perdita is found.

 [_Presenting Perdita who kneels to Hermione._]

HERMIONE.
You gods, look down,
And from your sacred vials pour your graces
Upon my daughters head! Tell me, mine own,
Where hast thou been preservd? where livd? how found
Thy fathers court? for thou shalt hear that I,
Knowing by Paulina that the oracle
Gave hope thou wast in being, have preservd
Myself to see the issue.

PAULINA.
Theres time enough for that;
Lest they desire upon this push to trouble
Your joys with like relation. Go together,
You precious winners all; your exultation
Partake to everyone. I, an old turtle,
Will wing me to some witherd bough, and there
My mate, thats never to be found again,
Lament till I am lost.

LEONTES.
O peace, Paulina!
Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,
As I by thine a wife: this is a match,
And made between s by vows. Thou hast found mine;
But how, is to be questiond; for I saw her,
As I thought, dead; and have in vain said many
A prayer upon her grave. Ill not seek far
For him, I partly know his mindto find thee
An honourable husband. Come, Camillo,
And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty
Is richly noted, and here justified
By us, a pair of kings. Lets from this place.
What! look upon my brother: both your pardons,
That eer I put between your holy looks
My ill suspicion. This your son-in-law,
And son unto the king, whom heavens directing,
Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Paulina,
Lead us from hence; where we may leisurely
Each one demand, and answer to his part
Performd in this wide gap of time, since first
We were disseverd. Hastily lead away!

 [_Exeunt._]





A LOVERS COMPLAINT



From off a hill whose concave womb reworded
A plaintful story from a sistring vale,
My spirits tattend this double voice accorded,
And down I laid to list the sad-tund tale;
Ere long espied a fickle maid full pale,
Tearing of papers, breaking rings a-twain,
Storming her world with sorrows wind and rain.

Upon her head a platted hive of straw,
Which fortified her visage from the sun,
Whereon the thought might think sometime it saw
The carcass of a beauty spent and done;
Time had not scythed all that youth begun,
Nor youth all quit, but spite of heavens fell rage
Some beauty peeped through lattice of seard age.

Oft did she heave her napkin to her eyne,
Which on it had conceited characters,
Laundring the silken figures in the brine
That seasoned woe had pelleted in tears,
And often reading what contents it bears;
As often shrieking undistinguishd woe,
In clamours of all size, both high and low.

Sometimes her levelld eyes their carriage ride,
As they did battry to the spheres intend;
Sometime diverted their poor balls are tied
To thorbed earth; sometimes they do extend
Their view right on; anon their gazes lend
To every place at once, and nowhere fixd,
The mind and sight distractedly commixd.

Her hair, nor loose nor tied in formal plat,
Proclaimd in her a careless hand of pride;
For some untuckd descended her sheavd hat,
Hanging her pale and pined cheek beside;
Some in her threaden fillet still did bide,
And, true to bondage, would not break from thence,
Though slackly braided in loose negligence.

A thousand favours from a maund she drew,
Of amber, crystal, and of beaded jet,
Which one by one she in a river threw,
Upon whose weeping margent she was set,
Like usury applying wet to wet,
Or monarchs hands, that lets not bounty fall
Where want cries some, but where excess begs all.

Of folded schedules had she many a one,
Which she perusd, sighd, tore and gave the flood;
Crackd many a ring of posied gold and bone,
Bidding them find their sepulchres in mud;
Found yet mo letters sadly pennd in blood,
With sleided silk, feat and affectedly
Enswathd, and seald to curious secrecy.

These often bathd she in her fluxive eyes,
And often kissd, and often gave to tear;
Cried, O false blood, thou register of lies,
What unapproved witness dost thou bear!
Ink would have seemd more black and damned here!
This said, in top of rage the lines she rents,
Big discontent so breaking their contents.

A reverend man that grazed his cattle nigh,
Sometime a blusterer, that the ruffle knew
Of court, of city, and had let go by
The swiftest hours observed as they flew,
Towards this afflicted fancy fastly drew;
And, privilegd by age, desires to know
In brief the grounds and motives of her woe.

So slides he down upon his grained bat,
And comely distant sits he by her side,
When he again desires her, being sat,
Her grievance with his hearing to divide:
If that from him there may be aught applied
Which may her suffering ecstasy assuage,
Tis promised in the charity of age.

Father, she says, though in me you behold
The injury of many a blasting hour,
Let it not tell your judgement I am old,
Not age, but sorrow, over me hath power.
I might as yet have been a spreading flower,
Fresh to myself, if I had self-applied
Love to myself, and to no love beside.

But woe is me! Too early I attended
A youthful suit; it was to gain my grace;
O one by natures outwards so commended,
That maidens eyes stuck over all his face,
Love lackd a dwelling and made him her place;
And when in his fair parts she did abide,
She was new lodgd and newly deified.

His browny locks did hang in crooked curls,
And every light occasion of the wind
Upon his lips their silken parcels hurls,
Whats sweet to do, to do will aptly find,
Each eye that saw him did enchant the mind:
For on his visage was in little drawn,
What largeness thinks in paradise was sawn.

Small show of man was yet upon his chin;
His phoenix down began but to appear,
Like unshorn velvet, on that termless skin,
Whose bare out-braggd the web it seemed to wear.
Yet showd his visage by that cost more dear,
And nice affections wavering stood in doubt
If best were as it was, or best without.

His qualities were beauteous as his form,
For maiden-tongued he was, and thereof free;
Yet if men movd him, was he such a storm
As oft twixt May and April is to see,
When winds breathe sweet, unruly though they be.
His rudeness so with his authorizd youth
Did livery falseness in a pride of truth.

Well could he ride, and often men would say
That horse his mettle from his rider takes,
Proud of subjection, noble by the sway,
What rounds, what bounds, what course, what stop he makes!
And controversy hence a question takes,
Whether the horse by him became his deed,
Or he his manage by th well-doing steed.

But quickly on this side the verdict went,
His real habitude gave life and grace
To appertainings and to ornament,
Accomplishd in himself, not in his case;
All aids, themselves made fairer by their place,
Came for additions; yet their purposd trim
Piecd not his grace, but were all gracd by him.

So on the tip of his subduing tongue
All kind of arguments and question deep,
All replication prompt, and reason strong,
For his advantage still did wake and sleep,
To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep:
He had the dialect and different skill,
Catching all passions in his craft of will.

That he did in the general bosom reign
Of young, of old, and sexes both enchanted,
To dwell with him in thoughts, or to remain
In personal duty, following where he haunted,
Consents bewitchd, ere he desire, have granted,
And dialogued for him what he would say,
Askd their own wills, and made their wills obey.

Many there were that did his picture get
To serve their eyes, and in it put their mind,
Like fools that in th imagination set
The goodly objects which abroad they find
Of lands and mansions, theirs in thought assignd,
And labouring in moe pleasures to bestow them,
Than the true gouty landlord which doth owe them.

So many have, that never touchd his hand,
Sweetly supposd them mistress of his heart.
My woeful self that did in freedom stand,
And was my own fee-simple (not in part)
What with his art in youth, and youth in art,
Threw my affections in his charmed power,
Reservd the stalk and gave him all my flower.

Yet did I not, as some my equals did,
Demand of him, nor being desired yielded,
Finding myself in honour so forbid,
With safest distance I mine honour shielded.
Experience for me many bulwarks builded
Of proofs new-bleeding, which remaind the foil
Of this false jewel, and his amorous spoil.

But ah! Who ever shunnd by precedent
The destind ill she must herself assay,
Or forced examples gainst her own content,
To put the by-passd perils in her way?
Counsel may stop a while what will not stay:
For when we rage, advice is often seen
By blunting us to make our wills more keen.

Nor gives it satisfaction to our blood,
That we must curb it upon others proof,
To be forbode the sweets that seems so good,
For fear of harms that preach in our behoof.
O appetite, from judgement stand aloof!
The one a palate hath that needs will taste,
Though reason weep and cry, It is thy last.

For further I could say, This mans untrue,
And knew the patterns of his foul beguiling;
Heard where his plants in others orchards grew,
Saw how deceits were gilded in his smiling;
Knew vows were ever brokers to defiling;
Thought characters and words merely but art,
And bastards of his foul adulterate heart.

And long upon these terms I held my city,
Till thus he gan besiege me: Gentle maid,
Have of my suffering youth some feeling pity,
And be not of my holy vows afraid:
Thats to ye sworn, to none was ever said,
For feasts of love I have been calld unto,
Till now did neer invite, nor never woo.

All my offences that abroad you see
Are errors of the blood, none of the mind:
Love made them not; with acture they may be,
Where neither party is nor true nor kind,
They sought their shame that so their shame did find,
And so much less of shame in me remains,
By how much of me their reproach contains.

Among the many that mine eyes have seen,
Not one whose flame my heart so much as warmed,
Or my affection put to th smallest teen,
Or any of my leisures ever charmed:
Harm have I done to them, but neer was harmed;
Kept hearts in liveries, but mine own was free,
And reignd commanding in his monarchy.

Look here what tributes wounded fancies sent me,
Of pallid pearls and rubies red as blood,
Figuring that they their passions likewise lent me
Of grief and blushes, aptly understood
In bloodless white and the encrimsond mood;
Effects of terror and dear modesty,
Encampd in hearts, but fighting outwardly.

And, lo! behold these talents of their hair,
With twisted metal amorously empleachd,
I have receivd from many a several fair,
Their kind acceptance weepingly beseechd,
With th annexions of fair gems enrichd,
And deep-braind sonnets that did amplify
Each stones dear nature, worth and quality.

The diamond, why twas beautiful and hard,
Whereto his invisd properties did tend,
The deep green emerald, in whose fresh regard
Weak sights their sickly radiance do amend;
The heaven-hued sapphire and the opal blend
With objects manifold; each several stone,
With wit well blazond smild, or made some moan.

Lo, all these trophies of affections hot,
Of pensivd and subdued desires the tender,
Nature hath chargd me that I hoard them not,
But yield them up where I myself must render,
That is, to you, my origin and ender:
For these of force must your oblations be,
Since I their altar, you empatron me.

O then advance of yours that phraseless hand,
Whose white weighs down the airy scale of praise;
Take all these similes to your own command,
Hallowed with sighs that burning lungs did raise:
What me, your minister for you, obeys,
Works under you; and to your audit comes
Their distract parcels in combined sums.

Lo, this device was sent me from a nun,
Or sister sanctified of holiest note,
Which late her noble suit in court did shun,
Whose rarest havings made the blossoms dote;
For she was sought by spirits of richest coat,
But kept cold distance, and did thence remove
To spend her living in eternal love.

But O, my sweet, what labour ist to leave
The thing we have not, mastring what not strives,
Planing the place which did no form receive,
Playing patient sports in unconstrained gyves,
She that her fame so to herself contrives,
The scars of battle scapeth by the flight,
And makes her absence valiant, not her might.

O pardon me, in that my boast is true,
The accident which brought me to her eye,
Upon the moment did her force subdue,
And now she would the caged cloister fly:
Religious love put out religions eye:
Not to be tempted would she be immurd,
And now to tempt all, liberty procurd.

How mighty then you are, O hear me tell!
The broken bosoms that to me belong
Have emptied all their fountains in my well,
And mine I pour your ocean all among:
I strong oer them, and you oer me being strong,
Must for your victory us all congest,
As compound love to physic your cold breast.

My parts had powr to charm a sacred nun,
Who, disciplind and dieted in grace,
Believd her eyes when they tassail begun,
All vows and consecrations giving place.
O most potential love! Vow, bond, nor space,
In thee hath neither sting, knot, nor confine,
For thou art all and all things else are thine.

When thou impressest, what are precepts worth
Of stale example? When thou wilt inflame,
How coldly those impediments stand forth,
Of wealth, of filial fear, law, kindred, fame!
Loves arms are peace, gainst rule, gainst sense, gainst shame,
And sweetens, in the suffring pangs it bears,
The aloes of all forces, shocks and fears.

Now all these hearts that do on mine depend,
Feeling it break, with bleeding groans they pine,
And supplicant their sighs to your extend,
To leave the battry that you make gainst mine,
Lending soft audience to my sweet design,
And credent soul to that strong-bonded oath,
That shall prefer and undertake my troth.

This said, his watry eyes he did dismount,
Whose sights till then were levelld on my face;
Each cheek a river running from a fount
With brinish current downward flowed apace.
O how the channel to the stream gave grace!
Who, glazd with crystal gate the glowing roses
That flame through water which their hue encloses.

O father, what a hell of witchcraft lies
In the small orb of one particular tear!
But with the inundation of the eyes
What rocky heart to water will not wear?
What breast so cold that is not warmed here?
O cleft effect! Cold modesty, hot wrath,
Both fire from hence and chill extincture hath.

For lo, his passion, but an art of craft,
Even there resolvd my reason into tears;
There my white stole of chastity I daffd,
Shook off my sober guards, and civil fears,
Appear to him as he to me appears,
All melting, though our drops this diffrence bore:
His poisond me, and mine did him restore.

In him a plenitude of subtle matter,
Applied to cautels, all strange forms receives,
Of burning blushes, or of weeping water,
Or swooning paleness; and he takes and leaves,
In eithers aptness, as it best deceives,
To blush at speeches rank, to weep at woes,
Or to turn white and swoon at tragic shows.

That not a heart which in his level came
Could scape the hail of his all-hurting aim,
Showing fair nature is both kind and tame;
And veild in them, did win whom he would maim.
Against the thing he sought he would exclaim;
When he most burned in heart-wishd luxury,
He preachd pure maid, and praisd cold chastity.

Thus merely with the garment of a grace,
The naked and concealed fiend he coverd,
That thunexperient gave the tempter place,
Which, like a cherubin, above them hoverd.
Who, young and simple, would not be so loverd?
Ay me! I fell, and yet do question make
What I should do again for such a sake.

O, that infected moisture of his eye,
O, that false fire which in his cheek so glowd!
O, that forcd thunder from his heart did fly,
O, that sad breath his spongy lungs bestowd,
O, all that borrowed motion, seeming owed,
Would yet again betray the fore-betrayed,
And new pervert a reconciled maid.




THE PASSIONATE PILGRIM




I


When my love swears that she is made of truth,
I do believe her, though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutord youth,
Unskilful in the worlds false forgeries.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although I know my years be past the best,
I smiling credit her false-speaking tongue,
Outfacing faults in love with loves ill rest.
But wherefore says my love that she is young?
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
O, loves best habit is a soothing tongue,
And age, in love, loves not to have years told.
    Therefore, Ill lie with love, and love with me,
    Since that our faults in love thus smotherd be.




II


Two loves I have, of comfort and despair,
That like two spirits do suggest me still;
My better angel is a man right fair,
My worser spirit a woman colourd ill.
To win me soon to hell, my female evil
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
Wooing his purity with her fair pride.
And whether that my angel be turnd fiend,
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
For being both to me, both to each friend,
I guess one angel in anothers hell:
    The truth I shall not know, but live in doubt,
    Till my bad angel fire my good one out.




III


Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
Gainst whom the world could not hold argument,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore; but I will prove,
Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee:
My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;
Thy grace being gaind cures all disgrace in me.
My vow was breath, and breath a vapour is;
Then, thou fair sun, that on this earth doth shine,
Exhale this vapour vow; in thee it is;
If broken then, it is no fault of mine.
    If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
    To break an oath, to win a paradise?




IV


Sweet Cytherea, sitting by a brook
With young Adonis, lovely, fresh and green,
Did court the lad with many a lovely look,
Such looks as none could look but beautys queen.
She told him stories to delight his ear;
She showd him favours to allure his eye;
To win his heart, she touchd him here and there;
Touches so soft still conquer chastity.
But whether unripe years did want conceit,
Or he refusd to take her figurd proffer,
The tender nibbler would not touch the bait,
But smile and jest at every gentle offer.
    Then fell she on her back, fair queen, and toward:
    He rose and ran away; ah, fool too froward!




V


If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?
O never faith could hold, if not to beauty vowed.
Though to myself forsworn, to thee Ill constant prove;
Those thoughts, to me like oaks, to thee like osiers bowed.
Study his bias leaves, and makes his book thine eyes,
Where all those pleasures live that art can comprehend.
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice;
Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend,
All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder;
Which is to me some praise, that I thy parts admire.
Thine eye Joves lightning seems, thy voice his dreadful thunder,
Which, not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire.
    Celestial as thou art, O do not love that wrong,
    To sing heavens praise with such an earthly tongue.




VI


Scarce had the sun dried up the dewy morn,
And scarce the herd gone to the hedge for shade,
When Cytherea, all in love forlorn,
A longing tarriance for Adonis made
Under an osier growing by a brook,
A brook where Adon used to cool his spleen.
Hot was the day; she hotter that did look
For his approach, that often there had been.
Anon he comes, and throws his mantle by,
And stood stark naked on the brooks green brim:
The sun lookd on the world with glorious eye,
Yet not so wistly as this queen on him.
    He, spying her, bouncd in, whereas he stood,
    O Jove, quoth she, why was not I a flood?




VII


Fair is my love, but not so fair as fickle,
Mild as a dove, but neither true nor trusty,
Brighter than glass, and yet, as glass is, brittle,
Softer than wax, and yet, as iron, rusty:
    A lily pale, with damask dye to grace her,
    None fairer, nor none falser to deface her.

Her lips to mine how often hath she joined,
Between each kiss her oaths of true love swearing!
How many tales to please me hath she coined,
Dreading my love, the loss thereof still fearing!
    Yet in the midst of all her pure protestings,
    Her faith, her oaths, her tears, and all were jestings.

She burnt with love, as straw with fire flameth;
She burnt out love, as soon as straw out-burneth;
She framd the love, and yet she foild the framing;
She bade love last, and yet she fell a-turning.
    Was this a lover, or a lecher whether?
    Bad in the best, though excellent in neither.




VIII


If music and sweet poetry agree,
As they must needs, the sister and the brother,
Then must the love be great twixt thee and me,
Because thou lovst the one and I the other.
Dowland to thee is dear, whose heavenly touch
Upon the lute doth ravish human sense;
Spenser to me, whose deep conceit is such
As passing all conceit, needs no defence.
Thou lovst to hear the sweet melodious sound
That Phbus lute, the queen of music, makes;
And I in deep delight am chiefly drownd
Whenas himself to singing he betakes.
    One god is god of both, as poets feign;
    One knight loves both, and both in thee remain.




IX


Fair was the morn when the fair queen of love,
        *        *        *        *        *        *
Paler for sorrow than her milk-white dove,
For Adons sake, a youngster proud and wild;
Her stand she takes upon a steep-up hill;
Anon Adonis comes with horn and hounds;
She, silly queen, with more than loves good will,
Forbade the boy he should not pass those grounds.
Once, quoth she, did I see a fair sweet youth
Here in these brakes deep-wounded with a boar,
Deep in the thigh, a spectacle of ruth!
See in my thigh, quoth she, here was the sore.
    She showed hers: he saw more wounds than one,
    And blushing fled, and left her all alone.




X


Sweet rose, fair flower, untimely pluckd, soon vaded,
Pluckd in the bud and vaded in the spring!
Bright orient pearl, alack, too timely shaded!
Fair creature, killd too soon by deaths sharp sting!
    Like a green plum that hangs upon a tree,
    And falls, through wind, before the fall should be.

I weep for thee, and yet no cause I have;
For why thou leftst me nothing in thy will;
And yet thou leftst me more than I did crave;
For why I craved nothing of thee still.
    O yes, dear friend, I pardon crave of thee,
    Thy discontent thou didst bequeath to me.




XI


Venus, with young Adonis sitting by her
Under a myrtle shade, began to woo him;
She told the youngling how god Mars did try her,
And as he fell to her, she fell to him.
Even thus, quoth she, the warlike god embracd me,
And then she clippd Adonis in her arms;
Even thus, quoth she, the warlike god unlaced me;
As if the boy should use like loving charms;
Even thus, quoth she, he seized on my lips,
And with her lips on his did act the seizure;
And as she fetched breath, away he skips,
And would not take her meaning nor her pleasure.
    Ah, that I had my lady at this bay,
    To kiss and clip me till I run away!




XII


Crabbed age and youth cannot live together:
Youth is full of pleasance, age is full of care;
Youth like summer morn, age like winter weather;
Youth like summer brave, age like winter bare.
Youth is full of sport, ages breath is short;
    Youth is nimble, age is lame;
Youth is hot and bold, age is weak and cold;
    Youth is wild, and age is tame.
Age, I do abhor thee; youth, I do adore thee;
    O, my love, my love is young!
Age, I do defy thee. O, sweet shepherd, hie thee,
For methinks thou stayst too long.




XIII


Beauty is but a vain and doubtful good,
A shining gloss that vadeth suddenly;
A flower that dies when first it gins to bud;
A brittle glass thats broken presently:
    A doubtful good, a gloss, a glass, a flower,
    Lost, vaded, broken, dead within an hour.

And as goods lost are seld or never found,
As vaded gloss no rubbing will refresh,
As flowers dead lie witherd on the ground,
As broken glass no cement can redress,
    So beauty blemishd once, for evers lost,
    In spite of physic, painting, pain and cost.




XIV


Good night, good rest. Ah, neither be my share:
She bade good night that kept my rest away;
And daffd me to a cabin hangd with care,
To descant on the doubts of my decay.
    Farewell, quoth she, and come again tomorrow:
    Fare well I could not, for I suppd with sorrow.

Yet at my parting sweetly did she smile,
In scorn or friendship, nill I conster whether:
T may be, she joyd to jest at my exile,
T may be, again to make me wander thither:
    Wander, a word for shadows like myself,
    As take the pain, but cannot pluck the pelf.

Lord, how mine eyes throw gazes to the east!
My heart doth charge the watch; the morning rise
Doth cite each moving sense from idle rest.
Not daring trust the office of mine eyes,
    While Philomela sits and sings, I sit and mark,
    And wish her lays were tuned like the lark.

For she doth welcome daylight with her ditty,
And drives away dark dreaming night.
The night so packd, I post unto my pretty;
Heart hath his hope and eyes their wished sight;
    Sorrow changd to solace, solace mixd with sorrow;
    For why, she sighd, and bade me come tomorrow.

Were I with her, the night would post too soon;
But now are minutes added to the hours;
To spite me now, each minute seems a moon;
Yet not for me, shine sun to succour flowers!
    Pack night, peep day; good day, of night now borrow:
    Short, night, tonight, and length thyself tomorrow.




XV


It was a lordings daughter, the fairest one of three,
That liked of her master as well as well might be,
Till looking on an Englishman, the fairest that eye could see,
    Her fancy fell a-turning.
Long was the combat doubtful, that love with love did fight,
To leave the master loveless, or kill the gallant knight;
To put in practice either, alas, it was a spite
    Unto the silly damsel!
But one must be refused; more mickle was the pain,
That nothing could be used to turn them both to gain,
For of the two the trusty knight was wounded with disdain:
    Alas she could not help it!
Thus art with arms contending was victor of the day,
Which by a gift of learning did bear the maid away:
Then lullaby, the learned man hath got the lady gay;
    For now my song is ended.




XVI


On a day, alack the day!
Love, whose month was ever May,
Spied a blossom passing fair,
Playing in the wanton air.
Through the velvet leaves the wind
All unseen gan passage find,
That the lover, sick to death,
Wishd himself the heavens breath:
Air, quoth he, thy cheeks may blow;
Air, would I might triumph so!
But, alas, my hand hath sworn
Neer to pluck thee from thy thorn:
Vow, alack, for youth unmeet,
Youth, so apt to pluck a sweet!
Thou for whom Jove would swear
Juno but an Ethiope were,
And deny himself for Jove,
Turning mortal for thy love.




XVII


My flocks feed not, my ewes breed not,
My rams speed not, all is amis:
Love is dying, faiths defying,
Hearts denying, causer of this.
All my merry jigs are quite forgot,
All my ladys love is lost, God wot:
Where her faith was firmely fixd in love,
There a nay is placd without remove.
One silly cross wrought all my loss;
O frowning fortune, cursed fickle dame!
For now I see inconstancy
More in women than in men remain.

In black mourn I, all fears scorn I,
Love hath forlorn me, living in thrall.
Heart is bleeding, all help needing,
O cruel speeding, fraughted with gall.
My shepherds pipe can sound no deal.
My weathers bell rings doleful knell;
My curtal dog that wont to have playd,
Plays not at all, but seems afraid.
With sighs so deep procures to weep,
In howling wise, to see my doleful plight.
How sighs resound through heartless ground,
Like a thousand vanquishd men in bloody fight!

Clear wells spring not, sweet birds sing not,
Green plants bring not forth their dye;
Herds stands weeping, flocks all sleeping,
Nymphs black peeping fearfully.
All our pleasure known to us poor swains,
All our merry meetings on the plains,
All our evening sport from us is fled,
All our love is lost, for love is dead.
Farewel, sweet love, thy like neer was
For a sweet content, the cause of all my woe!
Poor Corydon must live alone;
Other help for him I see that there is none.




XVIII


Whenas thine eye hath chose the dame,
And stalld the deer that thou shouldst strike,
Let reason rule things worthy blame,
As well as fancy, partial might;
    Take counsel of some wiser head,
    Neither too young nor yet unwed.

And when thou comst thy tale to tell,
Smooth not thy tongue with filed talk,
Least she some subtle practice smell,
A cripple soon can find a halt,
    But plainly say thou lovst her well,
    And set her person forth to sale.

What though her frowning brows be bent,
Her cloudy looks will calm ere night,
And then too late she will repent,
That thus dissembled her delight;
    And twice desire, ere it be day,
    That which with scorn she put away.

What though she strive to try her strength,
And ban and brawl, and say thee nay,
Her feeble force will yield at length,
When craft hath taught her thus to say:
    Had women been so strong as men,
    In faith, you had not had it then.

And to her will frame all thy ways;
Spare not to spend, and chiefly there
Where thy desert may merit praise,
By ringing in thy ladys ear:
    The strongest castle, tower and town,
    The golden bullet beats it down.

Serve always with assured trust,
And in thy suit be humble true;
Unless thy lady prove unjust,
Press never thou to choose a new:
    When time shall serve, be thou not slack,
    To proffer, though she put thee back.

The wiles and guiles that women work,
Dissembled with an outward show,
The tricks and toys that in them lurk,
The cock that treads them shall not know,
    Have you not heard it said full oft,
    A womans nay doth stand for nought.

Think women still to strive with men,
To sin and never for to saint:
There is no heaven, by holy then,
When time with age shall them attaint,
    Were kisses all the joys in bed,
    One woman would another wed.

But soft, enough,too much,I fear
Lest that my mistress hear my song:
She will not stick to round me on th ear,
To teach my tongue to be so long.
    Yet will she blush, here be it said,
    To hear her secrets so bewrayd.




XIX


Live with me and be my love,
And we will all the pleasures prove
That hills and valleys, dales and fields,
And all the craggy mountains yield.

There will we sit upon the rocks,
And see the shepherds feed their flocks,
By shallow rivers, by whose falls
Melodious birds sing madrigals.

There will I make thee a bed of roses,
With a thousand fragrant posies,
A cap of flowers, and a kirtle
Embroidered all with leaves of myrtle.

A belt of straw and ivy buds,
With coral clasps and amber studs;
And if these pleasures may thee move,
Then live with me and be my love.

Loves Answer.

If that the world and love were young,
And truth in every shepherds tongue,
These pretty pleasures might me move
To live with thee and be thy love.




XX


As it fell upon a day
In the merry month of May,
Sitting in a pleasant shade
Which a grove of myrtles made,
Beasts did leap and birds did sing,
Trees did grow and plants did spring;
Everything did banish moan,
Save the nightingale alone:
She, poor bird, as all forlorn,
Leand her breast up-till a thorn,
And there sung the dolefullst ditty,
That to hear it was great pitty.
Fie, fie, fie, now would she cry,
Tereu, Tereu, by and by;

That to hear her so complain,
Scarce I could from tears refrain,
For her griefs so lively shown
Made me think upon mine own.
Ah, thought I, thou mournst in vain!
None takes pitty on thy pain.
Senseless trees they cannot hear thee,
Ruthless bears they will not cheer thee;
King Pandion he is dead,
All thy friends are lappd in lead,
All thy fellow birds do sing,
Careless of thy sorrowing.

Whilst as fickle fortune smiled,
Thou and I were both beguiled.
Every one that flatters thee
Is no friend in misery.
Words are easy, like the wind;
Faithful friends are hard to find.
Every man will be thy friend
Whilst thou hast wherewith to spend;
But if store of crowns be scant,
No man will supply thy want.
If that one be prodigal,
Bountiful they will him call,
And with such-like flattering,
Pity but he were a king.

If he be addict to vice,
Quickly him they will entice;
If to women he be bent,
They have at commandement.
But if Fortune once do frown,
Then farewell his great renown.
They that fawnd on him before,
Use his company no more.
He that is thy friend indeed,
He will help thee in thy need:
If thou sorrow, he will weep;
If thou wake, he cannot sleep.
Thus of every grief in heart
He with thee doth bear a part.
These are certain signs to know
Faithful friend from flattring foe.




THE PHOENIX AND THE TURTLE


Let the bird of loudest lay,
On the sole Arabian tree,
Herald sad and trumpet be,
To whose sound chaste wings obey.

But thou shrieking harbinger,
Foul precurrer of the fiend,
Augur of the fevers end,
To this troop come thou not near.

From this session interdict
Every fowl of tyrant wing,
Save the eagle, featherd king;
Keep the obsequy so strict.

Let the priest in surplice white,
That defunctive music can,
Be the death-divining swan,
Lest the requiem lack his right.

And thou treble-dated crow,
That thy sable gender makst
With the breath thou givst and takst,
Mongst our mourners shalt thou go.

Here the anthem doth commence:
Love and constancy is dead;
Phoenix and the turtle fled
In a mutual flame from hence.

So they lovd, as love in twain
Had the essence but in one;
Two distincts, division none:
Number there in love was slain.

Hearts remote, yet not asunder;
Distance and no space was seen
Twixt this turtle and his queen;
But in them it were a wonder.

So between them love did shine,
That the turtle saw his right
Flaming in the phoenix sight;
Either was the others mine.

Property was thus appalled,
That the self was not the same;
Single natures double name
Neither two nor one was called.

Reason, in itself confounded,
Saw division grow together;
To themselves yet either neither,
Simple were so well compounded.

That it cried, How true a twain
Seemeth this concordant one!
Love hath reason, reason none,
If what parts can so remain.

Whereupon it made this threne
To the phoenix and the dove,
Co-supremes and stars of love,
As chorus to their tragic scene.


       THRENOS

Beauty, truth, and rarity.
Grace in all simplicity,
Here enclosd in cinders lie.

Death is now the phoenix nest;
And the turtles loyal breast
To eternity doth rest.

Leaving no posterity:
Twas not their infirmity,
It was married chastity.

Truth may seem, but cannot be;
Beauty brag, but tis not she;
Truth and beauty buried be.

To this urn let those repair
That are either true or fair;
For these dead birds sigh a prayer.




THE RAPE OF LUCRECE


TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
HENRY WRIOTHESLEY, EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON,
and Baron of Titchfield.

The love I dedicate to your Lordship is without end; whereof this
pamphlet, without beginning, is but a superfluous moiety. The warrant I
have of your honourable disposition, not the worth of my untutored
lines, makes it assured of acceptance. What I have done is yours; what
I have to do is yours; being part in all I have, devoted yours. Were my
worth greater, my duty would show greater; meantime, as it is, it is
bound to your Lordship, to whom I wish long life, still lengthened with
all happiness.

                           Your Lordships in all duty,
                                WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.




THE ARGUMENT.


Lucius Tarquinius (for his excessive pride surnamed Superbus), after he
had caused his own father-in-law, Servius Tullius, to be cruelly
murdered, and, contrary to the Roman laws and customs, not requiring or
staying for the peoples suffrages, had possessed himself of the
kingdom, went, accompanied with his sons and other noblemen of Rome, to
besiege Ardea. During which siege the principal men of the army meeting
one evening at the tent of Sextus Tarquinius, the kings son, in their
discourses after supper, everyone commended the virtues of his own
wife; among whom Collatinus extolled the incomparable chastity of his
wife Lucretia. In that pleasant humour they all posted to Rome; and
intending, by their secret and sudden arrival, to make trial of that
which everyone had before avouched, only Collatinus finds his wife,
though it were late in the night, spinning amongst her maids: the other
ladies were all found dancing and revelling, or in several disports.
Whereupon the noblemen yielded Collatinus the victory, and his wife the
fame. At that time Sextus Tarquinius being inflamed with Lucreces
beauty, yet smothering his passions for the present, departed with the
rest back to the camp; from whence he shortly after privily withdrew
himself, and was (according to his estate) royally entertained and
lodged by Lucrece at Collatium. The same night he treacherously
stealeth into her chamber, violently ravished her, and early in the
morning speedeth away. Lucrece, in this lamentable plight, hastily
dispatched messengers, one to Rome for her father, another to the camp
for Collatine. They came, the one accompanied with Junius Brutus, the
other with Publius Valerius; and finding Lucrece attired in mourning
habit, demanded the cause of her sorrow. She, first taking an oath of
them for her revenge, revealed the actor, and whole manner of his
dealing, and withal suddenly stabbed herself. Which done, with one
consent they all vowed to root out the whole hated family of the
Tarquins; and bearing the dead body to Rome, Brutus acquainted the
people with the doer and manner of the vile deed, with a bitter
invective against the tyranny of the king; wherewith the people were so
moved, that with one consent and a general acclamation the Tarquins
were all exiled, and the state government changed from kings to
consuls.




From the besieged Ardea all in post,
Borne by the trustless wings of false desire,
Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host,
And to Collatium bears the lightless fire,
Which in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire
    And girdle with embracing flames the waist
    Of Collatines fair love, Lucrece the chaste.

Haply that name of chaste unhapply set
This bateless edge on his keen appetite,
When Collatine unwisely did not let
To praise the clear unmatched red and white
Which triumphed in that sky of his delight;
    Where mortal stars as bright as heavens beauties,
    With pure aspects did him peculiar duties.

For he the night before, in Tarquins tent
Unlocked the treasure of his happy state,
What priceless wealth the heavens had him lent
In the possession of his beauteous mate;
Reckning his fortune at such high proud rate
    That kings might be espoused to more fame,
    But king nor peer to such a peerless dame.

O happiness enjoyed but of a few,
And, if possessed, as soon decayed and done
As is the mornings silver melting dew
Against the golden splendour of the sun!
An expired date, cancelled ere well begun.
    Honour and beauty in the owners arms,
    Are weakly fortressed from a world of harms.

Beauty itself doth of itself persuade
The eyes of men without an orator;
What needeth then apologies be made,
To set forth that which is so singular?
Or why is Collatine the publisher
    Of that rich jewel he should keep unknown
    From thievish ears, because it is his own?

Perchance his boast of Lucrece sovreignty
Suggested this proud issue of a king;
For by our ears our hearts oft tainted be.
Perchance that envy of so rich a thing,
Braving compare, disdainfully did sting
    His high-pitched thoughts, that meaner men should vaunt
    That golden hap which their superiors want.

But some untimely thought did instigate
His all-too-timeless speed, if none of those;
His honour, his affairs, his friends, his state,
Neglected all, with swift intent he goes
To quench the coal which in his liver glows.
    O rash false heat, wrapped in repentant cold,
    Thy hasty spring still blasts and neer grows old!

When at Collatium this false lord arrived,
Well was he welcomed by the Roman dame,
Within whose face beauty and virtue strived
Which of them both should underprop her fame.
When virtue bragged, beauty would blush for shame;
    When beauty boasted blushes, in despite
    Virtue would stain that oer with silver white.

But beauty, in that white intituled
From Venus doves, doth challenge that fair field.
Then virtue claims from beauty beautys red,
Which virtue gave the golden age to gild
Their silver cheeks, and called it then their shield;
    Teaching them thus to use it in the fight,
    When shame assailed, the red should fence the white.

This heraldry in Lucrece face was seen,
Argued by beautys red and virtues white.
Of eithers colour was the other queen,
Proving from worlds minority their right.
Yet their ambition makes them still to fight;
    The sovereignty of either being so great,
    That oft they interchange each others seat.

Their silent war of lilies and of roses,
Which Tarquin viewed in her fair faces field,
In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses;
Where, lest between them both it should be killed,
The coward captive vanquished doth yield
    To those two armies that would let him go
    Rather than triumph in so false a foe.

Now thinks he that her husbands shallow tongue,
The niggard prodigal that praised her so,
In that high task hath done her beauty wrong,
Which far exceeds his barren skill to show.
Therefore that praise which Collatine doth owe
    Enchanted Tarquin answers with surmise,
    In silent wonder of still-gazing eyes.

This earthly saint, adored by this devil,
Little suspecteth the false worshipper;
For unstained thoughts do seldom dream on evil;
Birds never limed no secret bushes fear.
So guiltless she securely gives good cheer
    And reverend welcome to her princely guest,
    Whose inward ill no outward harm expressed.

For that he coloured with his high estate,
Hiding base sin in pleats of majesty,
That nothing in him seemed inordinate,
Save sometime too much wonder of his eye,
Which, having all, all could not satisfy;
    But, poorly rich, so wanteth in his store
    That, cloyed with much, he pineth still for more.

But she, that never coped with stranger eyes,
Could pick no meaning from their parling looks,
Nor read the subtle shining secrecies
Writ in the glassy margents of such books;
She touched no unknown baits, nor feared no hooks,
    Nor could she moralize his wanton sight,
    More than his eyes were opened to the light.

He stories to her ears her husbands fame,
Won in the fields of fruitful Italy;
And decks with praises Collatines high name,
Made glorious by his manly chivalry
With bruised arms and wreaths of victory.
    Her joy with heaved-up hand she doth express,
    And, wordless, so greets heaven for his success.

Far from the purpose of his coming thither,
He makes excuses for his being there.
No cloudy show of stormy blustring weather
Doth yet in his fair welkin once appear,
Till sable Night, mother of dread and fear,
    Upon the world dim darkness doth display,
    And in her vaulty prison stows the day.

For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed,
Intending weariness with heavy sprite;
For after supper long he questioned
With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night.
Now leaden slumber with lifes strength doth fight,
    And every one to rest themselves betake,
    Save thieves and cares and troubled minds that wake.

As one of which doth Tarquin lie revolving
The sundry dangers of his wills obtaining,
Yet ever to obtain his will resolving,
Though weak-built hopes persuade him to abstaining.
Despair to gain doth traffic oft for gaining,
    And when great treasure is the meed proposed,
    Though death be adjunct, theres no death supposed.

Those that much covet are with gain so fond
For what they have not, that which they possess
They scatter and unloose it from their bond;
And so, by hoping more, they have but less,
Or, gaining more, the profit of excess
    Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain,
    That they prove bankrout in this poor-rich gain.

The aim of all is but to nurse the life
With honour, wealth, and ease, in waning age;
And in this aim there is such thwarting strife
That one for all or all for one we gage:
As life for honour in fell battles rage,
    Honour for wealth; and oft that wealth doth cost
    The death of all, and all together lost.

So that in ventring ill we leave to be
The things we are, for that which we expect;
And this ambitious foul infirmity,
In having much, torments us with defect
Of that we have. So then we do neglect
    The thing we have, and, all for want of wit,
    Make something nothing by augmenting it.

Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make,
Pawning his honour to obtain his lust;
And for himself himself he must forsake.
Then where is truth, if there be no self-trust?
When shall he think to find a stranger just,
    When he himself himself confounds, betrays
    To slandrous tongues and wretched hateful days?

Now stole upon the time the dead of night,
When heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes.
No comfortable star did lend his light,
No noise but owls and wolves death-boding cries;
Now serves the season that they may surprise
    The silly lambs. Pure thoughts are dead and still,
    While lust and murder wake to stain and kill.

And now this lustful lord leaped from his bed,
Throwing his mantle rudely oer his arm;
Is madly tossed between desire and dread;
Th one sweetly flatters, th other feareth harm.
But honest fear, bewitched with lusts foul charm,
    Doth too too oft betake him to retire,
    Beaten away by brain-sick rude desire.

His falchion on a flint he softly smiteth,
That from the cold stone sparks of fire do fly;
Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth,
Which must be lodestar to his lustful eye,
And to the flame thus speaks advisedly:
    As from this cold flint I enforced this fire,
    So Lucrece must I force to my desire.

Here pale with fear he doth premeditate
The dangers of his loathsome enterprise,
And in his inward mind he doth debate
What following sorrow may on this arise.
Then looking scornfully, he doth despise
    His naked armour of still-slaughtered lust,
    And justly thus controls his thoughts unjust:

Fair torch, burn out thy light, and lend it not
To darken her whose light excelleth thine.
And die, unhallowed thoughts, before you blot
With your uncleanness that which is divine.
Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine.
    Let fair humanity abhor the deed
    That spots and stains loves modest snow-white weed.

O shame to knighthood and to shining arms!
O foul dishonour to my households grave!
O impious act including all foul harms!
A martial man to be soft fancys slave!
True valour still a true respect should have.
    Then my digression is so vile, so base,
    That it will live engraven in my face.

Yea, though I die, the scandal will survive
And be an eye-sore in my golden coat;
Some loathsome dash the herald will contrive,
To cipher me how fondly I did dote,
That my posterity, shamed with the note,
    Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin
    To wish that I their father had not been.

What win I if I gain the thing I seek?
A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy.
Who buys a minutes mirth to wail a week,
Or sells eternity to get a toy?
For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy?
    Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown,
    Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down?

If Collatinus dream of my intent,
Will he not wake, and in a desprate rage
Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent?
This siege that hath engirt his marriage,
This blur to youth, this sorrow to the sage,
    This dying virtue, this surviving shame,
    Whose crime will bear an ever-during blame?

O, what excuse can my invention make
When thou shalt charge me with so black a deed?
Will not my tongue be mute, my frail joints shake,
Mine eyes forgo their light, my false heart bleed?
The guilt being great, the fear doth still exceed;
    And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly,
    But coward-like with trembling terror die.

Had Collatinus killed my son or sire,
Or lain in ambush to betray my life,
Or were he not my dear friend, this desire
Might have excuse to work upon his wife,
As in revenge or quittal of such strife;
    But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend,
    The shame and fault finds no excuse nor end.

Shameful it is; ay, if the fact be known.
Hateful it is, there is no hate in loving.
Ill beg her love. But she is not her own.
The worst is but denial and reproving.
My will is strong, past reasons weak removing.
    Who fears a sentence or an old mans saw
    Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.

Thus, graceless, holds he disputation
Tween frozen conscience and hot-burning will,
And with good thoughts makes dispensation,
Urging the worser sense for vantage still;
Which in a moment doth confound and kill
    All pure effects, and doth so far proceed
    That what is vile shows like a virtuous deed.

Quoth he, She took me kindly by the hand,
And gazed for tidings in my eager eyes,
Fearing some hard news from the warlike band
Where her beloved Collatinus lies.
O how her fear did make her colour rise!
    First red as roses that on lawn we lay,
    Then white as lawn, the roses took away.

And how her hand, in my hand being locked,
Forced it to tremble with her loyal fear,
Which struck her sad, and then it faster rocked,
Until her husbands welfare she did hear;
Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer
    That had Narcissus seen her as she stood,
    Self-love had never drowned him in the flood.

Why hunt I then for colour or excuses?
All orators are dumb when beauty pleadeth.
Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses;
Love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth.
Affection is my captain, and he leadeth;
    And when his gaudy banner is displayed,
    The coward fights and will not be dismayed.

Then, childish fear, avaunt! Debating, die!
Respect and reason wait on wrinkled age!
My heart shall never countermand mine eye.
Sad pause and deep regard beseems the sage;
My part is youth, and beats these from the stage.
    Desire my pilot is, beauty my prize;
    Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies?

As corn oergrown by weeds, so heedful fear
Is almost choked by unresisted lust.
Away he steals with opening, listning ear,
Full of foul hope, and full of fond mistrust;
Both which, as servitors to the unjust,
    So cross him with their opposite persuasion
    That now he vows a league, and now invasion.

Within his thought her heavenly image sits,
And in the self-same seat sits Collatine.
That eye which looks on her confounds his wits;
That eye which him beholds, as more divine,
Unto a view so false will not incline,
    But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart,
    Which once corrupted takes the worser part;

And therein heartens up his servile powers,
Who, flattered by their leaders jocund show,
Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours;
And as their captain, so their pride doth grow,
Paying more slavish tribute than they owe.
    By reprobate desire thus madly led,
    The Roman lord marcheth to Lucrece bed.

The locks between her chamber and his will,
Each one by him enforced, retires his ward;
But, as they open, they all rate his ill,
Which drives the creeping thief to some regard.
The threshold grates the door to have him heard;
    Night-wandring weasels shriek to see him there;
    They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear.

As each unwilling portal yields him way,
Through little vents and crannies of the place
The wind wars with his torch, to make him stay,
And blows the smoke of it into his face,
Extinguishing his conduct in this case;
    But his hot heart, which fond desire doth scorch,
    Puffs forth another wind that fires the torch.

And being lighted, by the light he spies
Lucretias glove, wherein her needle sticks;
He takes it from the rushes where it lies,
And griping it, the needle his finger pricks,
As who should say, This glove to wanton tricks
    Is not inured. Return again in haste;
    Thou seest our mistress ornaments are chaste.

But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him;
He in the worst sense construes their denial.
The doors, the wind, the glove that did delay him,
He takes for accidental things of trial;
Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial,
    Who with a lingring stay his course doth let,
    Till every minute pays the hour his debt.

So, so, quoth he, these lets attend the time,
Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring,
To add a more rejoicing to the prime,
And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing.
Pain pays the income of each precious thing:
    Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelves and sands
    The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.

Now is he come unto the chamber door
That shuts him from the heaven of his thought,
Which with a yielding latch, and with no more,
Hath barred him from the blessed thing he sought.
So from himself impiety hath wrought,
    That for his prey to pray he doth begin,
    As if the heavens should countenance his sin.

But in the midst of his unfruitful prayer,
Having solicited th eternal power
That his foul thoughts might compass his fair fair,
And they would stand auspicious to the hour,
Even there he starts. Quoth he, I must deflower.
    The powers to whom I pray abhor this fact,
    How can they then assist me in the act?

Then Love and Fortune be my gods, my guide!
My will is backed with resolution.
Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried;
The blackest sin is cleared with absolution.
Against loves fire fears frost hath dissolution.
    The eye of heaven is out, and misty night
    Covers the shame that follows sweet delight.

This said, his guilty hand plucked up the latch,
And with his knee the door he opens wide.
The dove sleeps fast that this night-owl will catch;
Thus treason works ere traitors be espied.
Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside;
    But she, sound sleeping, fearing no such thing,
    Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting.

Into the chamber wickedly he stalks,
And gazeth on her yet unstained bed.
The curtains being close, about he walks,
Rolling his greedy eyeballs in his head.
By their high treason is his heart misled,
    Which gives the watch-word to his hand full soon
    To draw the cloud that hides the silver moon.

Look as the fair and fiery-pointed sun,
Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaves our sight;
Even so, the curtain drawn, his eyes begun
To wink, being blinded with a greater light.
Whether it is that she reflects so bright,
    That dazzleth them, or else some shame supposed;
    But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed.

O, had they in that darksome prison died,
Then had they seen the period of their ill!
Then Collatine again by Lucrece side
In his clear bed might have reposed still.
But they must ope, this blessed league to kill;
    And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight
    Must sell her joy, her life, her worlds delight.

Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under,
Cozning the pillow of a lawful kiss;
Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,
Swelling on either side to want his bliss;
Between whose hills her head entombed is,
    Where like a virtuous monument she lies,
    To be admired of lewd unhallowed eyes.

Without the bed her other fair hand was,
On the green coverlet; whose perfect white
Showed like an April daisy on the grass,
With pearly sweat resembling dew of night.
Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light,
    And canopied in darkness sweetly lay,
    Till they might open to adorn the day.

Her hair, like golden threads, played with her breath:
O modest wantons, wanton modesty!
Showing lifes triumph in the map of death,
And deaths dim look in lifes mortality.
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify,
    As if between them twain there were no strife,
    But that life lived in death and death in life.

Her breasts like ivory globes circled with blue,
A pair of maiden worlds unconquered,
Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew,
And him by oath they truly honoured.
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred;
    Who, like a foul usurper, went about
    From this fair throne to heave the owner out.

What could he see but mightily he noted?
What did he note but strongly he desired?
What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,
And in his will his wilful eye he tired.
With more than admiration he admired
    Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,
    Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.

As the grim lion fawneth oer his prey,
Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,
So oer this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay,
His rage of lust by grazing qualified
Slaked, not suppressed; for standing by her side,
    His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,
    Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins.

And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,
Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting,
In bloody death and ravishment delighting,
Nor childrens tears nor mothers groans respecting,
Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting.
    Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,
    Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.

His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye,
His eye commends the leading to his hand;
His hand, as proud of such a dignity,
Smoking with pride, marched on to make his stand
On her bare breast, the heart of all her land;
    Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale,
    Left their round turrets destitute and pale.

They, mustring to the quiet cabinet
Where their dear governess and lady lies,
Do tell her she is dreadfully beset,
And fright her with confusion of their cries.
She, much amazed, breaks ope her locked-up eyes,
    Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,
    Are by his flaming torch dimmed and controlled.

Imagine her as one in dead of night
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,
That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite,
Whose grim aspect sets every joint a shaking.
What terror tis! but she, in worser taking,
    From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view
    The sight which makes supposed terror true.

Wrapped and confounded in a thousand fears,
Like to a new-killed bird she trembling lies.
She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears
Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes.
Such shadows are the weak brains forgeries;
    Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,
    In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.

His hand, that yet remains upon her breast,
Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!
May feel her heart, poor citizen, distressed,
Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.
    This moves in him more rage, and lesser pity,
    To make the breach and enter this sweet city.

First, like a trumpet doth his tongue begin
To sound a parley to his heartless foe,
Who oer the white sheet peers her whiter chin,
The reason of this rash alarm to know,
Which he by dumb demeanour seeks to show;
    But she with vehement prayers urgeth still
    Under what colour he commits this ill.

Thus he replies: The colour in thy face,
That even for anger makes the lily pale,
And the red rose blush at her own disgrace,
Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale.
Under that colour am I come to scale
    Thy never-conquered fort; the fault is thine,
    For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine.

Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide:
Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night,
Where thou with patience must my will abide,
My will that marks thee for my earths delight,
Which I to conquer sought with all my might.
    But as reproof and reason beat it dead,
    By thy bright beauty was it newly bred.

I see what crosses my attempt will bring;
I know what thorns the growing rose defends;
I think the honey guarded with a sting;
All this beforehand counsel comprehends.
But will is deaf, and hears no heedful friends;
    Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty,
    And dotes on what he looks, gainst law or duty.

I have debated, even in my soul,
What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed;
But nothing can affections course control,
Or stop the headlong fury of his speed.
I know repentant tears ensue the deed,
    Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity;
    Yet strike I to embrace mine infamy.

This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade,
Which, like a falcon towring in the skies,
Coucheth the fowl below with his wings shade,
Whose crooked beak threats, if he mount he dies.
So under his insulting falchion lies
    Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells
    With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcons bells.

Lucrece, quoth he, this night I must enjoy thee.
If thou deny, then force must work my way,
For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee;
That done, some worthless slave of thine Ill slay.
To kill thine honour with thy lifes decay;
    And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him,
    Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him.

So thy surviving husband shall remain
The scornful mark of every open eye;
Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain,
Thy issue blurred with nameless bastardy.
And thou, the author of their obloquy,
    Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes
     And sung by children in succeeding times.

But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend.
The fault unknown is as a thought unacted;
A little harm done to a great good end
For lawful policy remains enacted.
The poisonous simple sometimes is compacted
    In a pure compound; being so applied,
    His venom in effect is purified.

Then, for thy husband and thy childrens sake,
Tender my suit. Bequeath not to their lot
The shame that from them no device can take,
The blemish that will never be forgot,
Worse than a slavish wipe, or birth-hours blot:
    For marks descried in mens nativity
    Are natures faults, not their own infamy.

Here with a cockatrice dead-killing eye
He rouseth up himself and makes a pause;
While she, the picture of pure piety,
Like a white hind under the gripes sharp claws,
Pleads in a wilderness where are no laws,
    To the rough beast that knows no gentle right,
    Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite.

But when a black-faced cloud the world doth threat,
In his dim mist th aspiring mountains hiding,
From earths dark womb some gentle gust doth get,
Which blows these pitchy vapours from their biding,
Hindring their present fall by this dividing;
    So his unhallowed haste her words delays,
    And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays.

Yet, foul night-waking cat, he doth but dally,
While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth.
Her sad behaviour feeds his vulture folly,
A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth.
His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth
    No penetrable entrance to her plaining;
    Tears harden lust, though marble wear with raining.

Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fixed
In the remorseless wrinkles of his face.
Her modest eloquence with sighs is mixed,
Which to her oratory adds more grace.
She puts the period often from his place,
    And midst the sentence so her accent breaks
    That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks.

She conjures him by high almighty Jove,
By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendships oath,
By her untimely tears, her husbands love,
By holy human law, and common troth,
By heaven and earth, and all the power of both,
    That to his borrowed bed he make retire,
    And stoop to honour, not to foul desire.

Quoth she, Reward not hospitality
With such black payment as thou hast pretended;
Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee,
Mar not the thing that cannot be amended.
End thy ill aim before the shoot be ended;
    He is no woodman that doth bend his bow
    To strike a poor unseasonable doe.

My husband is thy friend; for his sake spare me.
Thyself art mighty; for thine own sake leave me.
Myself a weakling, do not then ensnare me;
Thou lookst not like deceit; do not deceive me.
My sighs, like whirlwinds, labour hence to heave thee.
    If ever man were moved with womans moans,
    Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans.

All which together, like a troubled ocean,
Beat at thy rocky and wrack-threatning heart,
To soften it with their continual motion;
For stones dissolved to water do convert.
O, if no harder than a stone thou art,
    Melt at my tears and be compassionate!
    Soft pity enters at an iron gate.

In Tarquins likeness I did entertain thee.
Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame?
To all the host of heaven I complain me,
Thou wrongst his honour, woundst his princely name.
Thou art not what thou seemst; and if the same,
    Thou seemst not what thou art, a god, a king;
    For kings like gods should govern everything.

How will thy shame be seeded in thine age,
When thus thy vices bud before thy spring?
If in thy hope thou darst do such outrage,
What darst thou not when once thou art a king?
O, be remembered, no outrageous thing
    From vassal actors can be wiped away;
    Then kings misdeeds cannot be hid in clay.

This deed will make thee only loved for fear,
But happy monarchs still are feared for love.
With foul offenders thou perforce must bear,
When they in thee the like offences prove.
If but for fear of this, thy will remove,
    For princes are the glass, the school, the book,
    Where subjects eyes do learn, do read, do look.

And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn?
Must he in thee read lectures of such shame?
Wilt thou be glass, wherein it shall discern
Authority for sin, warrant for blame,
To privilege dishonour in thy name?
    Thou backst reproach against long-living laud,
    And makst fair reputation but a bawd.

Hast thou command? By him that gave it thee,
From a pure heart command thy rebel will.
Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity,
For it was lent thee all that brood to kill.
Thy princely office how canst thou fulfill,
    When, patterned by thy fault, foul Sin may say
    He learned to sin, and thou didst teach the way?

Think but how vile a spectacle it were
To view thy present trespass in another.
Mens faults do seldom to themselves appear;
Their own transgressions partially they smother.
This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother.
    O how are they wrapped in with infamies
    That from their own misdeeds askance their eyes!

To thee, to thee, my heaved-up hands appeal,
Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier.
I sue for exiled majestys repeal;
Let him return, and flattring thoughts retire.
His true respect will prison false desire,
    And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne,
    That thou shalt see thy state, and pity mine.

Have done, quoth he. My uncontrolled tide
Turns not, but swells the higher by this let.
Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide,
And with the wind in greater fury fret.
The petty streams that pay a daily debt
    To their salt sovereign, with their fresh falls haste
    Add to his flow, but alter not his taste.

Thou art, quoth she, a sea, a sovereign king,
And, lo, there falls into thy boundless flood
Black lust, dishonour, shame, misgoverning,
Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood.
If all these petty ills shall change thy good,
    Thy sea within a puddles womb is hearsed,
    And not the puddle in thy sea dispersed.

So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave;
Thou nobly base, they basely dignified;
Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave;
Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride.
The lesser thing should not the greater hide;
    The cedar stoops not to the base shrubs foot,
    But low shrubs wither at the cedars root.

So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state
No more, quoth he, by heaven, I will not hear thee.
Yield to my love. If not, enforced hate,
Instead of loves coy touch, shall rudely tear thee.
That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee
    Unto the base bed of some rascal groom,
    To be thy partner in this shameful doom.

This said, he sets his foot upon the light,
For light and lust are deadly enemies.
Shame folded up in blind concealing night,
When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize.
The wolf hath seized his prey, the poor lamb cries,
    Till with her own white fleece her voice controlled
    Entombs her outcry in her lips sweet fold.

For with the nightly linen that she wears
He pens her piteous clamours in her head,
Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears
That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed.
O, that prone lust should stain so pure a bed!
    The spots whereof could weeping purify,
    Her tears should drop on them perpetually.

But she hath lost a dearer thing than life,
And he hath won what he would lose again.
This forced league doth force a further strife;
This momentary joy breeds months of pain;
This hot desire converts to cold disdain.
    Pure Chastity is rifled of her store,
    And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before.

Look as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk,
Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight,
Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk
The prey wherein by nature they delight;
So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night.
    His taste delicious, in digestion souring,
    Devours his will, that lived by foul devouring.

O deeper sin than bottomless conceit
Can comprehend in still imagination!
Drunken desire must vomit his receipt,
Ere he can see his own abomination.
While lust is in his pride no exclamation
    Can curb his heat or rein his rash desire,
    Till, like a jade, self-will himself doth tire.

And then with lank and lean discoloured cheek,
With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace,
Feeble desire, all recreant, poor, and meek,
Like to a bankrout beggar wails his case.
The flesh being proud, desire doth fight with Grace,
    For there it revels; and when that decays,
    The guilty rebel for remission prays.

So fares it with this faultful lord of Rome,
Who this accomplishment so hotly chased;
For now against himself he sounds this doom,
That through the length of times he stands disgraced.
Besides, his souls fair temple is defaced,
    To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares,
    To ask the spotted princess how she fares.

She says her subjects with foul insurrection
Have battered down her consecrated wall,
And by their mortal fault brought in subjection
Her immortality, and made her thrall
To living death and pain perpetual,
    Which in her prescience she controlled still,
    But her foresight could not forestall their will.

Een in this thought through the dark night he stealeth,
A captive victor that hath lost in gain,
Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth,
The scar that will, despite of cure, remain;
Leaving his spoil perplexed in greater pain.
    She bears the load of lust he left behind,
    And he the burden of a guilty mind.

He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence;
She like a wearied lamb lies panting there;
He scowls, and hates himself for his offence;
She, desperate, with her nails her flesh doth tear.
He faintly flies, sweating with guilty fear;
    She stays, exclaiming on the direful night;
    He runs, and chides his vanished, loathed delight.

He thence departs a heavy convertite;
She there remains a hopeless castaway.
He in his speed looks for the morning light;
She prays she never may behold the day.
For day, quoth she, nights scapes doth open lay,
    And my true eyes have never practised how
    To cloak offences with a cunning brow.

They think not but that every eye can see
The same disgrace which they themselves behold;
And therefore would they still in darkness be,
To have their unseen sin remain untold.
For they their guilt with weeping will unfold,
    And grave, like water that doth eat in steel,
    Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.

Here she exclaims against repose and rest,
And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind.
She wakes her heart by beating on her breast,
And bids it leap from thence, where it may find
Some purer chest, to close so pure a mind.
    Frantic with grief thus breathes she forth her spite
    Against the unseen secrecy of night.

O comfort-killing night, image of hell,
Dim register and notary of shame,
Black stage for tragedies and murders fell,
Vast sin-concealing chaos, nurse of blame,
Blind muffled bawd, dark harbour for defame,
    Grim cave of death, whispring conspirator
    With close-tongued treason and the ravisher!

O hateful, vaporous, and foggy night,
Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime,
Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light,
Make war against proportioned course of time;
Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb
    His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed,
    Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head.

With rotten damps ravish the morning air;
Let their exhaled unwholesome breaths make sick
The life of purity, the supreme fair,
Ere he arrive his weary noontide prick.
And let thy misty vapours march so thick,
    That in their smoky ranks his smothered light
    May set at noon and make perpetual night.

Were Tarquin night, as he is but nights child,
The silver-shining queen he would distain;
Her twinkling handmaids too, by him defiled,
Through Nights black bosom should not peep again.
So should I have co-partners in my pain;
    And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage,
    As palmers chat makes short their pilgrimage.

Where now I have no one to blush with me,
To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine,
To mask their brows, and hide their infamy;
But I alone alone must sit and pine,
Seasoning the earth with showers of silver brine,
    Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans,
    Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans.

O night, thou furnace of foul reeking smoke,
Let not the jealous day behold that face
Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak
Immodesty lies martyred with disgrace!
Keep still possession of thy gloomy place,
    That all the faults which in thy reign are made
    May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade.

Make me not object to the tell-tale day.
The light will show charactered in my brow
The story of sweet chastitys decay,
The impious breach of holy wedlock vow.
Yea, the illiterate, that know not how
    To cipher what is writ in learned books,
    Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks.

The nurse, to still her child, will tell my story
And fright her crying babe with Tarquins name.
The orator, to deck his oratory,
Will couple my reproach to Tarquins shame.
Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame,
    Will tie the hearers to attend each line,
    How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine.

Let my good name, that senseless reputation,
For Collatines dear love be kept unspotted.
If that be made a theme for disputation,
The branches of another root are rotted,
And undeserved reproach to him allotted
    That is as clear from this attaint of mine
    As I, ere this, was pure to Collatine.

O unseen shame, invisible disgrace!
O unfelt sore, crest-wounding, private scar!
Reproach is stamped in Collatinus face,
And Tarquins eye may read the mot afar,
How he in peace is wounded, not in war.
    Alas, how many bear such shameful blows,
    Which not themselves, but he that gives them knows!

If, Collatine, thine honour lay in me,
From me by strong assault it is bereft.
My honey lost, and I, a drone-like bee,
Have no perfection of my summer left,
But robbed and ransacked by injurious theft.
    In thy weak hive a wandring wasp hath crept,
    And sucked the honey which thy chaste bee kept.

Yet am I guilty of thy honours wrack;
Yet for thy honour did I entertain him.
Coming from thee, I could not put him back,
For it had been dishonour to disdain him.
Besides, of weariness he did complain him,
    And talked of virtue. O unlooked-for evil,
    When virtue is profaned in such a devil!

Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud?
Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows nests?
Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud?
Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts?
Or kings be breakers of their own behests?
    But no perfection is so absolute
    That some impurity doth not pollute.

The aged man that coffers up his gold
Is plagued with cramps, and gouts and painful fits,
And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold,
But like still-pining Tantalus he sits,
And useless barns the harvest of his wits,
    Having no other pleasure of his gain
    But torment that it cannot cure his pain.

So then he hath it when he cannot use it,
And leaves it to be mastered by his young,
Who in their pride do presently abuse it.
Their father was too weak, and they too strong,
To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long.
    The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours
    Even in the moment that we call them ours.

Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring;
Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers;
The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing;
What virtue breeds iniquity devours.
We have no good that we can say is ours,
    But ill-annexed Opportunity
    Or kills his life or else his quality.

O Opportunity, thy guilt is great!
Tis thou that executst the traitors treason;
Thou sets the wolf where he the lamb may get;
Whoever plots the sin, thou pointst the season.
Tis thou that spurnst at right, at law, at reason;
    And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him,
    Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him.

Thou makst the vestal violate her oath;
Thou blowst the fire when temperance is thawed;
Thou smotherst honesty, thou murderst troth,
Thou foul abettor, thou notorious bawd!
Thou plantest scandal and displacest laud.
    Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief,
    Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief.

Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame,
Thy private feasting to a public fast,
Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name,
Thy sugared tongue to bitter wormwood taste.
Thy violent vanities can never last.
    How comes it then, vile Opportunity,
    Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee?

When wilt thou be the humble suppliants friend,
And bring him where his suit may be obtained?
When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end,
Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chained?
Give physic to the sick, ease to the pained?
    The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee;
    But they neer meet with Opportunity.

The patient dies while the physician sleeps;
The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds;
Justice is feasting while the widow weeps;
Advice is sporting while infection breeds.
Thou grantst no time for charitable deeds.
    Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murders rages,
    Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages.

When truth and virtue have to do with thee,
A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid;
They buy thy help; but Sin neer gives a fee;
He gratis comes, and thou art well appaid
As well to hear as grant what he hath said.
    My Collatine would else have come to me
    When Tarquin did, but he was stayed by thee.

Guilty thou art of murder and of theft,
Guilty of perjury and subornation,
Guilty of treason, forgery, and shift,
Guilty of incest, that abomination:
An accessory by thine inclination
    To all sins past and all that are to come,
    From the creation to the general doom.

Misshapen Time, copesmate of ugly night,
Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care,
Eater of youth, false slave to false delight,
Base watch of woes, sins pack-horse, virtues snare!
Thou nursest all and murdrest all that are.
    O hear me then, injurious, shifting Time!
    Be guilty of my death, since of my crime.

Why hath thy servant, Opportunity
Betrayed the hours thou gavst me to repose,
Cancelled my fortunes, and enchained me
To endless date of never-ending woes?
Times office is to fine the hate of foes,
    To eat up errors by opinion bred,
    Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed.

Times glory is to calm contending kings,
To unmask falsehood and bring truth to light,
To stamp the seal of time in aged things,
To wake the morn and sentinel the night,
To wrong the wronger till he render right,
    To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours,
    And smear with dust their glittring golden towers;

To fill with worm-holes stately monuments,
To feed oblivion with decay of things,
To blot old books and alter their contents,
To pluck the quills from ancient ravens wings,
To dry the old oaks sap and cherish springs,
    To spoil antiquities of hammered steel,
    And turn the giddy round of Fortunes wheel;

To show the beldam daughters of her daughter,
To make the child a man, the man a child,
To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter,
To tame the unicorn and lion wild,
To mock the subtle in themselves beguiled,
    To cheer the ploughman with increaseful crops,
    And waste huge stones with little water-drops.

Why workst thou mischief in thy pilgrimage,
Unless thou couldst return to make amends?
One poor retiring minute in an age
Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends,
Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends.
    O, this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back,
    I could prevent this storm and shun thy wrack!

Thou ceaseless lackey to eternity,
With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight.
Devise extremes beyond extremity,
To make him curse this cursed crimeful night.
Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright,
    And the dire thought of his committed evil
    Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil.

Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances,
Afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans;
Let there bechance him pitiful mischances,
To make him moan, but pity not his moans.
Stone him with hardned hearts harder than stones,
    And let mild women to him lose their mildness,
    Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness.

Let him have time to tear his curled hair,
Let him have time against himself to rave,
Let him have time of Times help to despair,
Let him have time to live a loathed slave,
Let him have time a beggars orts to crave,
    And time to see one that by alms doth live
    Disdain to him disdained scraps to give.

Let him have time to see his friends his foes,
And merry fools to mock at him resort;
Let him have time to mark how slow time goes
In time of sorrow, and how swift and short
His time of folly and his time of sport;
    And ever let his unrecalling crime
    Have time to wail th abusing of his time.

O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad,
Teach me to curse him that thou taughtst this ill!
At his own shadow let the thief run mad,
Himself himself seek every hour to kill.
Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill,
    For who so base would such an office have
    As slandrous deathsman to so base a slave?

The baser is he, coming from a king,
To shame his hope with deeds degenerate.
The mightier man, the mightier is the thing
That makes him honoured or begets him hate;
For greatest scandal waits on greatest state.
    The moon being clouded presently is missed,
    But little stars may hide them when they list.

The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire,
And unperceived fly with the filth away;
But if the like the snow-white swan desire,
The stain upon his silver down will stay.
Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day.
    Gnats are unnoted wheresoeer they fly,
    But eagles gazed upon with every eye.

Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools,
Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators!
Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools;
Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters;
To trembling clients be you mediators.
    For me, I force not argument a straw,
    Since that my case is past the help of law.

In vain I rail at Opportunity,
At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful night;
In vain I cavil with mine infamy,
In vain I spurn at my confirmed despite.
This helpless smoke of words doth me no right.
    The remedy indeed to do me good
    Is to let forth my foul defiled blood.

Poor hand, why quiverst thou at this decree?
Honour thyself to rid me of this shame,
For if I die, my honour lives in thee,
But if I live, thou livst in my defame.
Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame,
    And wast afeared to scratch her wicked foe,
    Kill both thyself and her for yielding so.

This said, from her betumbled couch she starteth,
To find some desprate instrument of death;
But this no slaughterhouse no tool imparteth
To make more vent for passage of her breath,
Which, thronging through her lips, so vanisheth
    As smoke from tna, that in air consumes,
    Or that which from discharged cannon fumes.

In vain, quoth she, I live, and seek in vain
Some happy mean to end a hapless life.
I feared by Tarquins falchion to be slain,
Yet for the self-same purpose seek a knife.
But when I feared I was a loyal wife;
    So am I now.O no, that cannot be!
    Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me.

O that is gone for which I sought to live,
And therefore now I need not fear to die.
To clear this spot by death, at least I give
A badge of fame to slanders livery,
A dying life to living infamy.
    Poor helpless help, the treasure stoln away,
    To burn the guiltless casket where it lay!

Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt not know
The stained taste of violated troth;
I will not wrong thy true affection so,
To flatter thee with an infringed oath.
This bastard graff shall never come to growth;
    He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute
    That thou art doting father of his fruit.

Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought,
Nor laugh with his companions at thy state;
But thou shalt know thy intrest was not bought
Basely with gold, but stoln from forth thy gate.
For me, I am the mistress of my fate,
    And with my trespass never will dispense,
    Till life to death acquit my forced offence.

I will not poison thee with my attaint,
Nor fold my fault in cleanly-coined excuses;
My sable ground of sin I will not paint,
To hide the truth of this false nights abuses.
My tongue shall utter all; mine eyes, like sluices,
    As from a mountain-spring that feeds a dale,
    Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.

By this, lamenting Philomel had ended
The well-tuned warble of her nightly sorrow,
And solemn night with slow sad gait descended
To ugly hell; when, lo, the blushing morrow
Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow.
    But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see,
    And therefore still in night would cloistered be.

Revealing day through every cranny spies,
And seems to point her out where she sits weeping,
To whom she sobbing speaks: O eye of eyes,
Why pryst thou through my window? Leave thy peeping,
Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping.
    Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light,
    For day hath naught to do whats done by night.

Thus cavils she with everything she sees.
True grief is fond and testy as a child,
Who wayward once, his mood with naught agrees.
Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild.
Continuance tames the one; the other wild,
    Like an unpractised swimmer plunging still
    With too much labour drowns for want of skill.

So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care,
Holds disputation with each thing she views,
And to herself all sorrow doth compare;
No object but her passions strength renews,
And as one shifts, another straight ensues.
    Sometime her grief is dumb and hath no words;
    Sometime tis mad and too much talk affords.

The little birds that tune their mornings joy
Make her moans mad with their sweet melody.
For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy;
Sad souls are slain in merry company.
Grief best is pleased with griefs society;
    True sorrow then is feelingly sufficed
    When with like semblance it is sympathized.

Tis double death to drown in ken of shore;
He ten times pines that pines beholding food;
To see the salve doth make the wound ache more;
Great grief grieves most at that would do it good;
Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood,
    Who, being stopped, the bounding banks oerflows;
    Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows.

You mocking birds, quoth she, your tunes entomb
Within your hollow-swelling feathered breasts,
And in my hearing be you mute and dumb;
My restless discord loves no stops nor rests.
A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests.
    Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears;
    Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears.

Come, Philomel, that singst of ravishment,
Make thy sad grove in my disheveled hair.
As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment,
So I at each sad strain will strain a tear
And with deep groans the diapason bear;
    For burden-wise Ill hum on Tarquin still,
    While thou on Tereus descants better skill.

And whiles against a thorn thou bearst thy part
To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I,
To imitate thee well, against my heart
Will fix a sharp knife to affright mine eye,
Who if it wink shall thereon fall and die.
    These means, as frets upon an instrument,
    Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment.

And for, poor bird, thou singst not in the day,
As shaming any eye should thee behold,
Some dark deep desert seated from the way,
That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold,
Will we find out; and there we will unfold
    To creatures stern sad tunes to change their kinds.
    Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.

As the poor frighted deer that stands at gaze,
Wildly determining which way to fly,
Or one encompassed with a winding maze,
That cannot tread the way out readily;
So with herself is she in mutiny,
    To live or die which of the twain were better,
    When life is shamed and Death reproachs debtor.

To kill myself, quoth she, alack, what were it,
But with my body my poor souls pollution?
They that lose half with greater patience bear it
Than they whose whole is swallowed in confusion.
That mother tries a merciless conclusion
    Who, having two sweet babes, when death takes one,
    Will slay the other, and be nurse to none.

My body or my soul, which was the dearer,
When the one pure, the other made divine?
Whose love of either to myself was nearer,
When both were kept for heaven and Collatine?
Ay me, the bark pilled from the lofty pine,
    His leaves will wither and his sap decay;
    So must my soul, her bark being pilled away.

Her house is sacked, her quiet interrupted,
Her mansion battered by the enemy,
Her sacred temple spotted, spoiled, corrupted,
Grossly engirt with daring infamy.
Then let it not be called impiety,
    If in this blemished fort I make some hole
    Through which I may convey this troubled soul.

Yet die I will not till my Collatine
Have heard the cause of my untimely death,
That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine,
Revenge on him that made me stop my breath.
My stained blood to Tarquin Ill bequeath,
    Which by him tainted shall for him be spent,
    And as his due writ in my testament.

My honour Ill bequeath unto the knife
That wounds my body so dishonoured.
Tis honour to deprive dishonoured life;
The one will live, the other being dead.
So of shames ashes shall my fame be bred,
    For in my death I murder shameful scorn;
    My shame so dead, mine honour is new born.

Dear lord of that dear jewel I have lost,
What legacy shall I bequeath to thee?
My resolution, love, shall be thy boast,
By whose example thou revenged mayst be.
How Tarquin must be used, read it in me;
    Myself, thy friend, will kill myself, thy foe,
    And for my sake serve thou false Tarquin so.

This brief abridgement of my will I make:
My soul and body to the skies and ground;
My resolution, husband, do thou take;
Mine honour be the knifes that makes my wound;
My shame be his that did my fame confound;
    And all my fame that lives disbursed be
    To those that live and think no shame of me.

Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will;
How was I overseen that thou shalt see it!
My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill;
My lifes foul deed my lifes fair end shall free it.
Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say, So be it.
    Yield to my hand; my hand shall conquer thee.
    Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be.

This plot of death when sadly she had laid,
And wiped the brinish pearl from her bright eyes,
With untuned tongue she hoarsely called her maid,
Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies;
For fleet-winged duty with thoughts feathers flies.
    Poor Lucrece cheeks unto her maid seem so
    As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow.

Her mistress she doth give demure good-morrow,
With soft slow tongue, true mark of modesty,
And sorts a sad look to her ladys sorrow,
For why her face wore sorrows livery,
But durst not ask of her audaciously
    Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so,
    Nor why her fair cheeks over-washed with woe.

But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set,
Each flower moistened like a melting eye,
Even so the maid with swelling drops gan wet
Her circled eyne, enforced by sympathy
Of those fair suns set in her mistress sky,
    Who in a salt-waved ocean quench their light,
    Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night.

A pretty while these pretty creatures stand,
Like ivory conduits coral cisterns filling.
One justly weeps; the other takes in hand
No cause, but company, of her drops spilling.
Their gentle sex to weep are often willing,
    Grieving themselves to guess at others smarts,
    And then they drown their eyes or break their hearts.

For men have marble, women waxen, minds,
And therefore are they formed as marble will;
The weak oppressed, th impression of strange kinds
Is formed in them by force, by fraud, or skill.
Then call them not the authors of their ill,
    No more than wax shall be accounted evil,
    Wherein is stamped the semblance of a devil.

Their smoothness, like a goodly champaign plain,
Lays open all the little worms that creep;
In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain
Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep.
Through crystal walls each little mote will peep.
    Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks,
    Poor womens faces are their own faults books.

No man inveigh against the withered flower,
But chide rough winter that the flower hath killed;
Not that devoured, but that which doth devour,
Is worthy blame. O, let it not be hild
Poor womens faults, that they are so fulfilled
    With mens abuses! Those proud lords, to blame,
    Make weak-made women tenants to their shame.

The precedent whereof in Lucrece view,
Assailed by night with circumstances strong
Of present death, and shame that might ensue
By that her death, to do her husband wrong.
Such danger to resistance did belong,
    The dying fear through all her body spread;
    And who cannot abuse a body dead?

By this, mild patience bid fair Lucrece speak
To the poor counterfeit of her complaining:
My girl, quoth she, on what occasion break
Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are raining?
If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining,
    Know, gentle wench, it small avails my mood.
    If tears could help, mine own would do me good.

But tell me, girl, when wentand there she stayed
Till after a deep groanTarquin from hence?
Madam, ere I was up, replied the maid,
The more to blame my sluggard negligence.
Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense:
    Myself was stirring ere the break of day,
    And, ere I rose, was Tarquin gone away.

But, lady, if your maid may be so bold,
She would request to know your heaviness.
O peace! quoth Lucrece. If it should be told,
The repetition cannot make it less;
For more it is than I can well express,
    And that deep torture may be called a hell,
    When more is felt than one hath power to tell.

Go, get me hither paper, ink, and pen.
Yet save that labour, for I have them here.
What should I say?One of my husbands men
Bid thou be ready by and by to bear
A letter to my lord, my love, my dear.
    Bid him with speed prepare to carry it;
    The cause craves haste, and it will soon be writ.

Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write,
First hovering oer the paper with her quill.
Conceit and grief an eager combat fight;
What wit sets down is blotted straight with will;
This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill.
    Much like a press of people at a door,
    Throng her inventions, which shall go before.

At last she thus begins: Thou worthy lord
Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee,
Health to thy person! Next vouchsafe t afford,
If ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see,
Some present speed to come and visit me.
    So I commend me from our house in grief.
    My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.

Here folds she up the tenor of her woe,
Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly.
By this short schedule Collatine may know
Her grief, but not her griefs true quality;
She dares not thereof make discovery,
    Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse,
    Ere she with blood had stained her stained excuse.

Besides, the life and feeling of her passion
She hoards, to spend when he is by to hear her;
When sighs and groans and tears may grace the fashion
Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her
From that suspicion which the world might bear her.
    To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter
    With words, till action might become them better.

To see sad sights moves more than hear them told,
For then the eye interprets to the ear
The heavy motion that it doth behold,
When every part a part of woe doth bear.
Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear.
    Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords,
    And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words.

Her letter now is sealed, and on it writ
At Ardea to my lord with more than haste.
The post attends, and she delivers it,
Charging the sour-faced groom to hie as fast
As lagging fowls before the northern blast.
    Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems;
    Extremely still urgeth such extremes.

The homely villain curtsies to her low,
And, blushing on her with a steadfast eye,
Receives the scroll without or yea or no,
And forth with bashful innocence doth hie.
But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie
    Imagine every eye beholds their blame,
    For Lucrece thought he blushed to see her shame,

When, silly groom! God wot, it was defect
Of spirit, life, and bold audacity.
Such harmless creatures have a true respect
To talk in deeds, while others saucily
Promise more speed, but do it leisurely.
    Even so this pattern of the worn-out age
    Pawned honest looks, but laid no words to gage.

His kindled duty kindled her mistrust,
That two red fires in both their faces blazed;
She thought he blushed, as knowing Tarquins lust,
And, blushing with him, wistly on him gazed.
Her earnest eye did make him more amazed.
    The more she saw the blood his cheeks replenish,
    The more she thought he spied in her some blemish.

But long she thinks till he return again,
And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone.
The weary time she cannot entertain,
For now tis stale to sigh, to weep, to groan;
So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan,
    That she her plaints a little while doth stay,
    Pausing for means to mourn some newer way.

At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece
Of skilful painting, made for Priams Troy,
Before the which is drawn the power of Greece,
For Helens rape the city to destroy,
Threatning cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy;
    Which the conceited painter drew so proud,
    As heaven, it seemed,  to kiss the turrets bowed.

A thousand lamentable objects there,
In scorn of Nature, Art gave lifeless life.
Many a dry drop seemed a weeping tear,
Shed for the slaughtered husband by the wife.
The red blood reeked to show the painters strife,
    The dying eyes gleamed forth their ashy lights,
    Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights.

There might you see the labouring pioneer
Begrimed with sweat and smeared all with dust;
And from the towers of Troy there would appear
The very eyes of men through loop-holes thrust,
Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust.
    Such sweet observance in this work was had,
    That one might see those far-off eyes look sad.

In great commanders grace and majesty
You might behold, triumphing in their faces;
In youth, quick bearing and dexterity;
And here and there the painter interlaces
Pale cowards marching on with trembling paces,
    Which heartless peasants did so well resemble,
    That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble.

In Ajax and Ulysses, O, what art
Of physiognomy might one behold!
The face of either ciphered eithers heart;
Their face their manners most expressly told.
In Ajax eyes blunt rage and rigour rolled,
    But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent
    Showed deep regard and smiling government.

There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand,
As twere encouraging the Greeks to fight,
Making such sober action with his hand
That it beguiled attention, charmed the sight.
In speech, it seemed, his beard, all silver white,
    Wagged up and down, and from his lips did fly
    Thin winding breath, which purled up to the sky.

About him were a press of gaping faces,
Which seemed to swallow up his sound advice,
All jointly listning, but with several graces,
As if some mermaid did their ears entice;
Some high, some low, the painter was so nice.
    The scalps of many, almost hid behind,
    To jump up higher seemed to mock the mind.

Here one mans hand leaned on anothers head,
His nose being shadowed by his neighbours ear;
Here one being thronged bears back, all bolln and red;
Another smothered seems to pelt and swear;
And in their rage such signs of rage they bear
    As, but for loss of Nestors golden words,
    It seemed they would debate with angry swords.

For much imaginary work was there,
Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind,
That for Achilles image stood his spear
Griped in an armed hand; himself, behind,
Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind.
    A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head,
    Stood for the whole to be imagined.

And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy,
When their brave hope, bold Hector, marched to field,
Stood many Trojan mothers, sharing joy
To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield;
And to their hope they such odd action yield
    That through their light joy seemed to appear,
    Like bright things stained, a kind of heavy fear.

And from the strand of Dardan, where they fought,
To Simois reedy banks the red blood ran,
Whose waves to imitate the battle sought
With swelling ridges, and their ranks began
To break upon the galled shore, and then
    Retire again till, meeting greater ranks,
    They join, and shoot their foam at Simois banks.

To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come,
To find a face where all distress is stelled.
Many she sees where cares have carved some,
But none where all distress and dolour dwelled,
Till she despairing Hecuba beheld,
    Staring on Priams wounds with her old eyes,
    Which bleeding under Pyrrhus proud foot lies.

In her the painter had anatomized
Times ruin, beautys wrack, and grim cares reign.
Her cheeks with chops and wrinkles were disguised;
Of what she was no semblance did remain.
Her blue blood, changed to black in every vein,
    Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed,
    Showed life imprisoned in a body dead.

On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes,
And shapes her sorrow to the beldams woes,
Who nothing wants to answer her but cries
And bitter words to ban her cruel foes.
The painter was no god to lend her those,
    And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong,
    To give her so much grief, and not a tongue.

Poor instrument, quoth she, without a sound,
Ill tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue,
And drop sweet balm in Priams painted wound,
And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong,
And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long,
    And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes
    Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies.

Show me the strumpet that began this stir,
That with my nails her beauty I may tear.
Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur
This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear;
Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here,
    And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye,
    The sire, the son, the dame, and daughter die.

Why should the private pleasure of some one
Become the public plague of many moe?
Let sin, alone committed, light alone
Upon his head that hath transgressed so;
Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe.
    For ones offence why should so many fall,
    To plague a private sin in general?

Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies,
Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus swounds;
Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies,
And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds,
And one mans lust these many lives confounds.
    Had doting Priam checked his sons desire,
    Troy had been bright with fame and not with fire.

Here feelingly she weeps Troys painted woes,
For sorrow, like a heavy-hanging bell,
Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes;
Then little strength rings out the doleful knell.
So Lucrece set a-work, sad tales doth tell
    To pencilled pensiveness and coloured sorrow;
    She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow.

She throws her eyes about the painting round,
And who she finds forlorn she doth lament.
At last she sees a wretched image bound,
That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent.
His face, though full of cares, yet showed content;
    Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes,
    So mild, that patience seemed to scorn his woes.

In him the painter laboured with his skill
To hide deceit and give the harmless show
An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still,
A brow unbent that seemed to welcome woe,
Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so
    That blushing red no guilty instance gave,
    Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have.

But, like a constant and confirmed devil,
He entertained a show so seeming just,
And therein so ensconced his secret evil,
That jealousy itself could not mistrust
False-creeping craft and perjury should thrust
    Into so bright a day such black-faced storms,
    Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms.

The well-skilled workman this mild image drew
For perjured Sinon, whose enchanting story
The credulous Old Priam after slew;
Whose words like wildfire burnt the shining glory
Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry,
    And little stars shot from their fixed places,
    When their glass fell wherein they viewed their faces.

This picture she advisedly perused,
And chid the painter for his wondrous skill,
Saying some shape in Sinons was abused;
So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill.
And still on him she gazed, and gazing still,
    Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied,
    That she concludes the picture was belied.

It cannot be, quoth she, that so much guile
She would have said can lurk in such a look.
But Tarquins shape came in her mind the while,
And from her tongue can lurk from cannot took.
It cannot be she in that sense forsook,
    And turned it thus: It cannot be, I find,
    But such a face should bear a wicked mind.

For even as subtle Sinon here is painted,
So sober-sad, so weary, and so mild,
As if with grief or travail he had fainted,
To me came Tarquin armed too, beguiled
With outward honesty, but yet defiled
    With inward vice. As Priam him did cherish,
    So did I Tarquin; so my Troy did perish.

Look, look, how listening Priam wets his eyes,
To see those borrowed tears that Sinon sheds!
Priam, why art thou old and yet not wise?
For every tear he falls a Trojan bleeds.
His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds;
    Those round clear pearls of his that move thy pity,
    Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city.

Such devils steal effects from lightless hell,
For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold,
And in that cold hot-burning fire doth dwell.
These contraries such unity do hold,
Only to flatter fools and make them bold;
    So Priams trust false Sinons tears doth flatter,
    That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.

Here, all enraged, such passion her assails,
That patience is quite beaten from her breast.
She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails,
Comparing him to that unhappy guest
Whose deed hath made herself herself detest.
    At last she smilingly with this gives oer;
    Fool, fool! quoth she, his wounds will not be sore.

Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow,
And time doth weary time with her complaining.
She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow,
And both she thinks too long with her remaining.
Short time seems long in sorrows sharp sustaining.
    Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps,
    And they that watch see time how slow it creeps.

Which all this time hath overslipped her thought,
That she with painted images hath spent,
Being from the feeling of her own grief brought
By deep surmise of others detriment,
Losing her woes in shows of discontent.
    It easeth some, though none it ever cured,
    To think their dolour others have endured.

But now the mindful messenger, come back,
Brings home his lord and other company;
Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black,
And round about her tear-distained eye
Blue circles streamed, like rainbows in the sky.
    These water-galls in her dim element
    Foretell new storms to those already spent.

Which when her sad-beholding husband saw,
Amazedly in her sad face he stares.
Her eyes, though sod in tears, looked red and raw,
Her lively colour killed with deadly cares.
He hath no power to ask her how she fares;
    Both stood like old acquaintance in a trance,
    Met far from home, wondring each others chance.

At last he takes her by the bloodless hand,
And thus begins: What uncouth ill event
Hath thee befalln, that thou dost trembling stand?
Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair colour spent?
Why art thou thus attired in discontent?
    Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness,
    And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.

Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire,
Ere once she can discharge one word of woe.
At length addressed to answer his desire,
She modestly prepares to let them know
Her honour is taen prisoner by the foe;
    While Collatine and his consorted lords
    With sad attention long to hear her words.

And now this pale swan in her watry nest
Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending:
Few words, quoth she, shall fit the trespass best,
Where no excuse can give the fault amending.
In me more woes than words are now depending;
    And my laments would be drawn out too long,
    To tell them all with one poor tired tongue.

Then be this all the task it hath to say:
Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed
A stranger came, and on that pillow lay
Where thou wast wont to rest thy weary head;
And what wrong else may be imagined
    By foul enforcement might be done to me,
    From that, alas, thy Lucrece is not free.

For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight,
With shining falchion in my chamber came
A creeping creature with a flaming light,
And softly cried Awake, thou Roman dame,
And entertain my love; else lasting shame
    On thee and thine this night I will inflict,
    If thou my loves desire do contradict.

For some hard-favoured groom of thine, quoth he,
Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will,
Ill murder straight, and then Ill slaughter thee
And swear I found you where you did fulfil
The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill
    The lechers in their deed. This act will be
    My fame and thy perpetual infamy.

With this, I did begin to start and cry,
And then against my heart he sets his sword,
Swearing, unless I took all patiently,
I should not live to speak another word;
So should my shame still rest upon record,
    And never be forgot in mighty Rome
    The adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom.

Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak,
And far the weaker with so strong a fear.
My bloody judge forbade my tongue to speak;
No rightful plea might plead for justice there.
His scarlet lust came evidence to swear
    That my poor beauty had purloined his eyes;
    And when the judge is robbed, the prisoner dies.

O, teach me how to make mine own excuse,
Or at the least, this refuge let me find:
Though my gross blood be stained with this abuse,
Immaculate and spotless is my mind;
That was not forced; that never was inclined
    To accessary yieldings, but still pure
    Doth in her poisoned closet yet endure.

Lo, here the hopeless merchant of this loss,
With head declined and voice dammed up with woe,
With sad set eyes and wretched arms across,
From lips new-waxen pale begins to blow
The grief away that stops his answer so.
    But wretched as he is, he strives in vain;
    What he breathes out his breath drinks up again.

As through an arch the violent roaring tide
Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste,
Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride
Back to the strait that forced him on so fast,
In rage sent out, recalled in rage, being past:
    Even so his sighs, his sorrows make a saw,
    To push grief on, and back the same grief draw.

Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth,
And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh:
Dear lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth
Another power; no flood by raining slaketh.
My woe too sensible thy passion maketh
    More feeling-painful. Let it then suffice
    To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes.

And for my sake, when I might charm thee so,
For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me:
Be suddenly revenged on my foe,
Thine, mine, his own. Suppose thou dost defend me
From what is past. The help that thou shalt lend me
    Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die,
    For sparing justice feeds iniquity.

But ere I name him, you fair lords, quoth she,
Speaking to those that came with Collatine,
Shall plight your honourable faiths to me,
With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine;
For tis a meritorious fair design
    To chase injustice with revengeful arms.
    Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies harms.

At this request, with noble disposition
Each present lord began to promise aid,
As bound in knighthood to her imposition,
Longing to hear the hateful foe bewrayed.
But she, that yet her sad task hath not said,
    The protestation stops. O, speak, quoth she,
    How may this forced stain be wiped from me?

What is the quality of my offence,
Being constrained with dreadful circumstance?
May my pure mind with the foul act dispense,
My low-declined honour to advance?
May any terms acquit me from this chance?
    The poisoned fountain clears itself again,
    And why not I from this compelled stain?

With this, they all at once began to say,
Her bodys stain her mind untainted clears,
While with a joyless smile she turns away
The face, that map which deep impression bears
Of hard misfortune, carved in it with tears.
    No, no, quoth she, no dame, hereafter living
    By my excuse shall claim excuses giving.

Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break,
She throws forth Tarquins name: He, he, she says,
But more than he her poor tongue could not speak;
Till after many accents and delays,
Untimely breathings, sick and short assays,
    She utters this: He, he, fair lords, tis he,
    That guides this hand to give this wound to me.

Even here she sheathed in her harmless breast
A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheathed.
That blow did bail it from the deep unrest
Of that polluted prison where it breathed.
Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeathed
    Her winged sprite, and through her wounds doth fly
    Lifes lasting date from cancelled destiny.

Stone-still, astonished with this deadly deed,
Stood Collatine and all his lordly crew,
Till Lucrece father that beholds her bleed,
Himself on her self-slaughtered body threw,
And from the purple fountain Brutus drew
    The murdrous knife, and, as it left the place,
    Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase;

And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide
In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood
Circles her body in on every side,
Who, like a late-sacked island, vastly stood
Bare and unpeopled in this fearful flood.
    Some of her blood still pure and red remained,
    And some looked black, and that false Tarquin stained.

About the mourning and congealed face
Of that black blood a watry rigol goes,
Which seems to weep upon the tainted place;
And ever since, as pitying Lucrece woes,
Corrupted blood some watery token shows,
    And blood untainted still doth red abide,
    Blushing at that which is so putrified.

Daughter, dear daughter, old Lucretius cries,
That life was mine which thou hast here deprived.
If in the child the fathers image lies,
Where shall I live now Lucrece is unlived?
Thou wast not to this end from me derived.
    If children predecease progenitors,
    We are their offspring, and they none of ours.

Poor broken glass, I often did behold
In thy sweet semblance my old age new born;
But now that fair fresh mirror, dim and old,
Shows me a bare-boned death by time outworn.
O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn,
    And shivered all the beauty of my glass,
    That I no more can see what once I was!

O time, cease thou thy course and last no longer,
If they surcease to be that should survive!
Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger,
And leave the faltring feeble souls alive?
The old bees die, the young possess their hive.
    Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again and see
    Thy father die, and not thy father thee!

By this starts Collatine as from a dream,
And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place;
And then in key-cold Lucrece bleeding stream
He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face,
And counterfeits to die with her a space;
    Till manly shame bids him possess his breath,
    And live to be revenged on her death.

The deep vexation of his inward soul
Hath served a dumb arrest upon his tongue;
Who, mad that sorrow should his use control
Or keep him from heart-easing words so long,
Begins to talk; but through his lips do throng
    Weak words, so thick come in his poor hearts aid
    That no man could distinguish what he said.

Yet sometime Tarquin was pronounced plain,
But through his teeth, as if the name he tore.
This windy tempest, till it blow up rain,
Held back his sorrows tide, to make it more.
At last it rains, and busy winds give oer.
    Then son and father weep with equal strife
    Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife.

The one doth call her his, the other his,
Yet neither may possess the claim they lay,
The father says Shes mine. O, mine she is,
Replies her husband. Do not take away
My sorrows interest; let no mourner say
    He weeps for her, for she was only mine,
    And only must be wailed by Collatine.

O, quoth Lucretius, I did give that life
Which she too early and too late hath spilled.
Woe, woe, quoth Collatine, she was my wife,
I owed her, and tis mine that she hath killed.
My daughter and my wife with clamours filled
    The dispersed air, who, holding Lucrece life,
    Answered their cries, my daughter and my wife.

Brutus, who plucked the knife from Lucrece side,
Seeing such emulation in their woe,
Began to clothe his wit in state and pride,
Burying in Lucrece wound his follys show.
He with the Romans was esteemed so
    As silly jeering idiots are with kings,
    For sportive words and uttring foolish things.

But now he throws that shallow habit by,
Wherein deep policy did him disguise,
And armed his long-hid wits advisedly,
To check the tears in Collatinus eyes.
Thou wronged lord of Rome, quoth he, arise!
    Let my unsounded self, supposed a fool,
    Now set thy long-experienced wit to school.

Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe?
Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds?
Is it revenge to give thyself a blow
For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds?
Such childish humour from weak minds proceeds.
    Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so,
    To slay herself, that should have slain her foe.

Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart
In such relenting dew of lamentations,
But kneel with me, and help to bear thy part
To rouse our Roman gods with invocations,
That they will suffer these abominations,
    Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgraced,
    By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chased.

Now, by the Capitol that we adore,
And by this chaste blood so unjustly stained,
By heavens fair sun that breeds the fat earths store,
By all our country rights in Rome maintained,
And by chaste Lucrece soul that late complained
    Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife,
    We will revenge the death of this true wife.

This said, he struck his hand upon his breast,
And kissed the fatal knife, to end his vow;
And to his protestation urged the rest,
Who, wondring at him, did his words allow.
Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow,
    And that deep vow which Brutus made before,
    He doth again repeat, and that they swore.

When they had sworn to this advised doom,
They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence,
To show her bleeding body thorough Rome,
And so to publish Tarquins foul offence;
Which being done with speedy diligence,
    The Romans plausibly did give consent
    To Tarquins everlasting banishment.




VENUS AND ADONIS



            _Vilia miretur vulgus; mihi flavus Apollo
            Pocula Castalia plena ministret aqua._




TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
HENRY WRIOTHESLEY,  EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON,
and Baron of Titchfield.

Right Honourable, I know not how I shall offend in dedicating my
unpolished lines to your lordship, nor how the world will censure me
for choosing so strong a prop to support so weak a burthen: only, if
your honour seem but pleased, I account myself highly praised, and vow
to take advantage of all idle hours, till I have honoured you with some
graver labour. But if the first heir of my invention prove deformed, I
shall be sorry it had so noble a godfather, and never after ear so
barren a land, for fear it yield me still so bad a harvest. I leave it
to your honourable survey, and your honour to your hearts content;
which I wish may always answer your own wish and the worlds hopeful
expectation.

Your honours in all duty,
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.






VENUS AND ADONIS

Even as the sun with purple-colourd face
Had taen his last leave of the weeping morn,
Rose-cheekd Adonis tried him to the chase;
Hunting he lovd, but love he laughd to scorn;        4
  Sick-thoughted Venus makes amain unto him,
  And like a bold-facd suitor gins to woo him.

Thrice fairer than myself, thus she began,
The fields chief flower, sweet above compare,        8
Stain to all nymphs, more lovely than a man,
More white and red than doves or roses are:
  Nature that made thee, with herself at strife,
  Saith that the world hath ending with thy life.     12

Vouchsafe, thou wonder, to alight thy steed,
And rein his proud head to the saddle-bow;
If thou wilt deign this favour, for thy meed
A thousand honey secrets shalt thou know:             16
  Here come and sit, where never serpent hisses,
  And being set, Ill smother thee with kisses.

And yet not cloy thy lips with loathd satiety,
But rather famish them amid their plenty,             20
Making them red, and pale, with fresh variety:
Ten kisses short as one, one long as twenty:
  A summers day will seem an hour but short,
  Being wasted in such time-beguiling sport.         24

With this she seizeth on his sweating palm,
The precedent of pith and livelihood,
And trembling in her passion, calls it balm,
Earths sovereign salve to do a goddess good:         28
  Being so enragd, desire doth lend her force
  Courageously to pluck him from his horse.

Over one arm the lusty coursers rein,
Under her other was the tender boy,                   32
Who blushd and pouted in a dull disdain,
With leaden appetite, unapt to toy;
  She red and hot as coals of glowing fire,
  He red for shame, but frosty in desire.             36

The studded bridle on a ragged bough
Nimbly she fastens;O! how quick is love!
The steed is stalled up, and even now
To tie the rider she begins to prove:                 40
  Backward she pushd him, as she would be thrust,
  And governd him in strength, though not in lust.

So soon was she along, as he was down,
Each leaning on their elbows and their hips:          44
Now doth she stroke his cheek, now doth he frown,
And gins to chide, but soon she stops his lips,
  And kissing speaks, with lustful language broken,
  If thou wilt chide, thy lips shall never open.    48

He burns with bashful shame, she with her tears
Doth quench the maiden burning of his cheeks;
Then with her windy sighs and golden hairs
To fan and blow them dry again she seeks.             52
  He saith she is immodest, blames her miss;
  What follows more, she murders with a kiss.

Even as an empty eagle, sharp by fast,
Tires with her beak on feathers, flesh and bone,      56
Shaking her wings, devouring all in haste,
Till either gorge be stuffd or prey be gone:
  Even so she kissd his brow, his cheek, his chin,
  And where she ends she doth anew begin.             60

Forcd to content, but never to obey,
Panting he lies, and breatheth in her face.
She feedeth on the steam, as on a prey,
And calls it heavenly moisture, air of grace,         64
  Wishing her cheeks were gardens full of flowers
  So they were dewd with such distilling showers.

Look how a bird lies tangled in a net,
So fastend in her arms Adonis lies;                  68
Pure shame and awd resistance made him fret,
Which bred more beauty in his angry eyes:
  Rain added to a river that is rank
  Perforce will force it overflow the bank.           72

Still she entreats, and prettily entreats,
For to a pretty ear she tunes her tale.
Still is he sullen, still he lours and frets,
Twixt crimson shame and anger ashy pale;             76
  Being red she loves him best, and being white,
  Her best is betterd with a more delight.

Look how he can, she cannot choose but love;
And by her fair immortal hand she swears,             80
From his soft bosom never to remove,
Till he take truce with her contending tears,
  Which long have raind, making her cheeks all wet;
  And one sweet kiss shall pay this countless debt.

Upon this promise did he raise his chin,               85
Like a dive-dapper peering through a wave,
Who, being lookd on, ducks as quickly in;
So offers he to give what she did crave,               88
  But when her lips were ready for his pay,
  He winks, and turns his lips another way.

Never did passenger in summers heat
More thirst for drink than she for this good turn.    92
Her help she sees, but help she cannot get;
She bathes in water, yet her fire must burn:
  O! pity, gan she cry, flint-hearted boy,
  Tis but a kiss I beg; why art thou coy?            96

I have been wood as I entreat thee now,
Even by the stern and direful god of war,
Whose sinewy neck in battle neer did bow,
Who conquers where he comes in every jar;             100
  Yet hath he been my captive and my slave,
  And beggd for that which thou unaskd shalt have.

Over my altars hath he hung his lance,
His batterd shield, his uncontrolled crest,          104
And for my sake hath learnd to sport and dance,
To toy, to wanton, dally, smile, and jest;
  Scorning his churlish drum and ensign red
  Making my arms his field, his tent my bed.         108

Thus he that overruld I overswayd,
Leading him prisoner in a red rose chain:
Strong-temperd steel his stronger strength obeyd,
Yet was he servile to my coy disdain.                112
  Oh be not proud, nor brag not of thy might,
  For mastring her that foild the god of fight.

Touch but my lips with those fair lips of thine,
Though mine be not so fair, yet are they red,        116
The kiss shall be thine own as well as mine:
What seest thou in the ground? hold up thy head,
  Look in mine eyeballs, there thy beauty lies;
  Then why not lips on lips, since eyes in eyes?     120

Art thou ashamd to kiss? then wink again,
And I will wink; so shall the day seem night.
Love keeps his revels where there are but twain;
Be bold to play, our sport is not in sight,          124
  These blue-veind violets whereon we lean
  Never can blab, nor know not what we mean.

The tender spring upon thy tempting lip             127
Shows thee unripe; yet mayst thou well be tasted,
Make use of time, let not advantage slip;
Beauty within itself should not be wasted,
  Fair flowers that are not gatherd in their prime
  Rot, and consume themselves in little time.         132

Were I hard-favourd, foul, or wrinkled old,
Ill-nurturd, crooked, churlish, harsh in voice,
Oerworn, despised, rheumatic, and cold,
Thick-sighted, barren, lean, and lacking juice,      136
  Then mightst thou pause, for then I were not for thee;
  But having no defects, why dost abhor me?

Thou canst not see one wrinkle in my brow,           139
Mine eyes are grey and bright, and quick in turning;
My beauty as the spring doth yearly grow,
My flesh is soft and plump, my marrow burning,
  My smooth moist hand, were it with thy hand felt,
  Would in thy palm dissolve, or seem to melt.       144

Bid me discourse, I will enchant thine ear,
Or like a fairy, trip upon the green,
Or like a nymph, with long dishevelld hair,
Dance on the sands, and yet no footing seen.         148
  Love is a spirit all compact of fire,
  Not gross to sink, but light, and will aspire.

Witness this primrose bank whereon I lie:           151
These forceless flowers like sturdy trees support me;
Two strengthless doves will draw me through the sky,
From morn till night, even where I list to sport me.
  Is love so light, sweet boy, and may it be
  That thou shouldst think it heavy unto thee?       156

Is thine own heart to thine own face affected?
Can thy right hand seize love upon thy left?
Then woo thyself, be of thyself rejected,
Steal thine own freedom, and complain on theft.      160
  Narcissus so himself himself forsook,
  And died to kiss his shadow in the brook.

Torches are made to light, jewels to wear,
Dainties to taste, fresh beauty for the use,         164
Herbs for their smell, and sappy plants to bear;
Things growing to themselves are growths abuse,
  Seeds spring from seeds, and beauty breedeth beauty;
  Thou wast begot; to get it is thy duty.            168

Upon the earths increase why shouldst thou feed,
Unless the earth with thy increase be fed?
By law of nature thou art bound to breed,
That thine may live when thou thyself art dead;      172
  And so in spite of death thou dost survive,
  In that thy likeness still is left alive.

By this the love-sick queen began to sweat,
For where they lay the shadow had forsook them,      176
And Titan, tired in the midday heat,
With burning eye did hotly overlook them,
  Wishing Adonis had his team to guide,
  So he were like him and by Venus side.            180

And now Adonis with a lazy spright,
And with a heavy, dark, disliking eye,
His louring brows oerwhelming his fair sight,
Like misty vapours when they blot the sky,           184
  Souring his cheeks, cries, Fie, no more of love:
  The sun doth burn my face; I must remove.

Ay me, quoth Venus, young, and so unkind!
What bare excuses makst thou to be gone!            188
Ill sigh celestial breath, whose gentle wind
Shall cool the heat of this descending sun:
  Ill make a shadow for thee of my hairs;
  If they burn too, Ill quench them with my tears.  192

The sun that shines from heaven shines but warm,
And lo I lie between that sun and thee:
The heat I have from thence doth little harm,
Thine eye darts forth the fire that burneth me;      196
  And were I not immortal, life were done,
  Between this heavenly and earthly sun.

Art thou obdurate, flinty, hard as steel?
Nay more than flint, for stone at rain relenteth:    200
Art thou a womans son and canst not feel
What tis to love, how want of love tormenteth?
  O had thy mother borne so hard a mind,
  She had not brought forth thee, but died unkind.   204

What am I that thou shouldst contemn me this?
Or what great danger dwells upon my suit?
What were thy lips the worse for one poor kiss?
Speak, fair; but speak fair words, or else be mute:  208
  Give me one kiss, Ill give it thee again,
  And one for intrest, if thou wilt have twain.

Fie, lifeless picture, cold and senseless stone,
Well-painted idol, image dull and dead,              212
Statue contenting but the eye alone,
Thing like a man, but of no woman bred:
  Thou art no man, though of a mans complexion,
  For men will kiss even by their own direction.    216

This said, impatience chokes her pleading tongue,
And swelling passion doth provoke a pause;
Red cheeks and fiery eyes blaze forth her wrong;
Being judge in love, she cannot right her cause.     220
  And now she weeps, and now she fain would speak,
  And now her sobs do her intendments break.

Sometimes she shakes her head, and then his hand,
Now gazeth she on him, now on the ground;            224
Sometimes her arms infold him like a band:
She would, he will not in her arms be bound;
  And when from thence he struggles to be gone,
  She locks her lily fingers one in one.             228

Fondling, she saith, since I have hemmd thee here
Within the circuit of this ivory pale,
Ill be a park, and thou shalt be my deer;
Feed where thou wilt, on mountain or in dale:        232
  Graze on my lips, and if those hills be dry,
  Stray lower, where the pleasant fountains lie.

Within this limit is relief enough,
Sweet bottom grass and high delightful plain,        236
Round rising hillocks, brakes obscure and rough,
To shelter thee from tempest and from rain:
  Then be my deer, since I am such a park,           239
  No dog shall rouse thee, though a thousand bark.

At this Adonis smiles as in disdain,
That in each cheek appears a pretty dimple;
Love made those hollows, if himself were slain,
He might be buried in a tomb so simple;              244
  Foreknowing well, if there he came to lie,
  Why there love livd, and there he could not die.

These lovely caves, these round enchanting pits,
Opend their mouths to swallow Venus liking.        248
Being mad before, how doth she now for wits?
Struck dead at first, what needs a second striking?
  Poor queen of love, in thine own law forlorn,
  To love a cheek that smiles at thee in scorn!      252

Now which way shall she turn? what shall she say?
Her words are done, her woes the more increasing;
The time is spent, her object will away,
And from her twining arms doth urge releasing:       256
  Pity, she cries; some favour, some remorse!
  Away he springs, and hasteth to his horse.

But lo from forth a copse that neighbours by,
A breeding jennet, lusty, young, and proud,          260
Adonis tramping courser doth espy,
And forth she rushes, snorts and neighs aloud:
  The strong-neckd steed, being tied unto a tree,
  Breaketh his rein, and to her straight goes he.    264

Imperiously he leaps, he neighs, he bounds,
And now his woven girths he breaks asunder;
The bearing earth with his hard hoof he wounds,
Whose hollow womb resounds like heavens thunder;
  The iron bit he crusheth tween his teeth,         269
  Controlling what he was controlled with.

His ears up-prickd; his braided hanging mane
Upon his compassd crest now stand on end;           272
His nostrils drink the air, and forth again,
As from a furnace, vapours doth he send:
  His eye, which scornfully glisters like fire,
  Shows his hot courage and his high desire.         276

Sometime he trots, as if he told the steps,
With gentle majesty and modest pride;
Anon he rears upright, curvets and leaps,
As who should say, Lo thus my strength is tried;
  And this I do to captivate the eye                 281
  Of the fair breeder that is standing by.

What recketh he his riders angry stir,
His flattering Holla, or his Stand, I say?       284
What cares he now for curb or pricking spur?
For rich caparisons or trappings gay?
  He sees his love, and nothing else he sees,
  Nor nothing else with his proud sight agrees.      288

Look when a painter would surpass the life,
In limning out a well-proportiond steed,
His art with natures workmanship at strife,
As if the dead the living should exceed:             292
  So did this horse excel a common one,
  In shape, in courage, colour, pace and bone.

Round-hoofd, short-jointed, fetlocks shag and long,
Broad breast, full eye, small head, and nostril wide,
High crest, short ears, straight legs and passing strong,
Thin mane, thick tail, broad buttock, tender hide:
  Look, what a horse should have he did not lack,
  Save a proud rider on so proud a back.             300

Sometimes he scuds far off, and there he stares;
Anon he starts at stirring of a feather:
To bid the wind a base he now prepares,
And where he run or fly they know not whether;       304
  For through his mane and tail the high wind sings,
  Fanning the hairs, who wave like featherd wings.

He looks upon his love, and neighs unto her;
She answers him as if she knew his mind,             308
Being proud, as females are, to see him woo her,
She puts on outward strangeness, seems unkind,
  Spurns at his love and scorns the heat he feels,
  Beating his kind embracements with her heels.      312

Then like a melancholy malcontent,
He vails his tail that like a falling plume,
Cool shadow to his melting buttock lent:
He stamps, and bites the poor flies in his fume.     316
  His love, perceiving how he was enragd,
  Grew kinder, and his fury was assuagd.

His testy master goeth about to take him,
When lo the unbackd breeder, full of fear,         320
Jealous of catching, swiftly doth forsake him,
With her the horse, and left Adonis there:
  As they were mad, unto the wood they hie them,
  Outstripping crows that strive to overfly them.    324

All swoln with chafing, down Adonis sits,
Banning his boisterous and unruly beast;
And now the happy season once more fits
That love-sick love by pleading may be blest;        328
  For lovers say, the heart hath treble wrong,
  When it is barrd the aidance of the tongue.

An oven that is stoppd, or river stayd,
Burneth more hotly, swelleth with more rage:         332
So of concealed sorrow may be said,
Free vent of words loves fire doth assuage;
  But when the hearts attorney once is mute,
  The client breaks, as desperate in his suit.       336

He sees her coming, and begins to glow,
Even as a dying coal revives with wind,
And with his bonnet hides his angry brow,
Looks on the dull earth with disturbed mind,         340
  Taking no notice that she is so nigh,
  For all askance he holds her in his eye.

O what a sight it was, wistly to view
How she came stealing to the wayward boy,            344
To note the fighting conflict of her hue,
How white and red each other did destroy:
  But now her cheek was pale, and by and by
  It flashd forth fire, as lightning from the sky.  348

Now was she just before him as he sat,
And like a lowly lover down she kneels;
With one fair hand she heaveth up his hat,
Her other tender hand his fair cheek feels:          352
  His tendrer cheek receives her soft hands print,
  As apt as new-falln snow takes any dint.

Oh what a war of looks was then between them,
Her eyes petitioners to his eyes suing,              356
His eyes saw her eyes, as they had not seen them,
Her eyes wood still, his eyes disdaind the wooing:
  And all this dumb play had his acts made plain
  With tears, which, chorus-like, her eyes did rain.

Full gently now she takes him by the hand,           361
A lily prisond in a gaol of snow,
Or ivory in an alabaster band,
So white a friend engirts so white a foe:            364
  This beauteous combat, wilful and unwilling,
  Showd like two silver doves that sit a-billing.

Once more the engine of her thoughts began:
O fairest mover on this mortal round,               368
Would thou wert as I am, and I a man,
My heart all whole as thine, thy heart my wound,
  For one sweet look thy help I would assure thee,
  Though nothing but my bodys bane would cure thee.

Give me my hand, saith he, why dost thou feel it?
Give me my heart, saith she, and thou shalt have it.
O give it me lest thy hard heart do steel it,
And being steeld, soft sighs can never grave it.    376
  Then loves deep groans I never shall regard,
  Because Adonis heart hath made mine hard.

For shame, he cries, let go, and let me go,
My days delight is past, my horse is gone,          380
And tis your fault I am bereft him so,
I pray you hence, and leave me here alone,
  For all my mind, my thought, my busy care,
  Is how to get my palfrey from the mare.           384

Thus she replies: Thy palfrey as he should,
Welcomes the warm approach of sweet desire,
Affection is a coal that must be coold;
Else, sufferd, it will set the heart on fire,       388
  The sea hath bounds, but deep desire hath none;
  Therefore no marvel though thy horse be gone.

How like a jade he stood tied to the tree,
Servilely masterd with a leathern rein!             392
But when he saw his love, his youths fair fee,
He held such petty bondage in disdain;
  Throwing the base thong from his bending crest,
  Enfranchising his mouth, his back, his breast.     396

Who sees his true-love in her naked bed,
Teaching the sheets a whiter hue than white,
But when his glutton eye so full hath fed,
His other agents aim at like delight?                400
  Who is so faint that dare not be so bold
  To touch the fire, the weather being cold?

Let me excuse thy courser, gentle boy,
And learn of him, I heartily beseech thee,           404
To take advantage on presented joy,
Though I were dumb, yet his proceedings teach thee.
  O learn to love, the lesson is but plain,
  And once made perfect, never lost again.          408

I know not love, quoth he, nor will not know it,
Unless it be a boar, and then I chase it;
Tis much to borrow, and I will not owe it;
My love to love is love but to disgrace it;          412
  For I have heard, it is a life in death,
  That laughs and weeps, and all but with a breath.

Who wears a garment shapeless and unfinishd?
Who plucks the bud before one leaf put forth?        416
If springing things be any jot diminishd,
They wither in their prime, prove nothing worth;
  The colt thats backd and burdend being young,
  Loseth his pride, and never waxeth strong.         420

You hurt my hand with wringing. Let us part,
And leave this idle theme, this bootless chat:
Remove your siege from my unyielding heart,
To loves alarms it will not ope the gate:           424
  Dismiss your vows, your feigned tears, your flattry;
  For where a heart is hard they make no battry.

What! canst thou talk? quoth she, hast thou a tongue?
O would thou hadst not, or I had no hearing;        428
Thy mermaids voice hath done me double wrong;
I had my load before, now pressd with bearing:
  Melodious discord, heavenly tune, harsh-sounding,
  Ears deep sweet music, and hearts deep sore wounding.

Had I no eyes but ears, my ears would love          433
That inward beauty and invisible;
Or were I deaf, thy outward parts would move
Each part in me that were but sensible:              436
  Though neither eyes nor ears, to hear nor see,
  Yet should I be in love by touching thee.

Say that the sense of feeling were bereft me,
And that I could not see, nor hear, nor touch,       440
And nothing but the very smell were left me,
Yet would my love to thee be still as much;
  For from the stillitory of thy face excelling
  Comes breath perfumd, that breedeth love by smelling.

But oh what banquet wert thou to the taste,         445
Being nurse and feeder of the other four;
Would they not wish the feast might ever last,
And bid suspicion double-lock the door,
  Lest jealousy, that sour unwelcome guest,
  Should by his stealing in disturb the feast?      448

Once more the ruby-colourd portal opend,
Which to his speech did honey passage yield,         452
Like a red morn that ever yet betokend
Wrack to the seaman, tempest to the field,
  Sorrow to shepherds, woe unto the birds,
  Gusts and foul flaws to herdmen and to herds.      456

This ill presage advisedly she marketh:
Even as the wind is hushd before it raineth,
Or as the wolf doth grin before he barketh,
Or as the berry breaks before it staineth,           460
  Or like the deadly bullet of a gun,
  His meaning struck her ere his words begun.

And at his look she flatly falleth down
For looks kill love, and love by looks reviveth;     464
A smile recures the wounding of a frown;
But blessed bankrout, that by love so thriveth!
  The silly boy, believing she is dead,
  Claps her pale cheek, till clapping makes it red.  468

And all amazd brake off his late intent,
For sharply he did think to reprehend her,
Which cunning love did wittily prevent:
Fair fall the wit that can so well defend her!       472
  For on the grass she lies as she were slain,
  Till his breath breatheth life in her again.

He wrings her nose, he strikes her on the cheeks,
He bends her fingers, holds her pulses hard,         476
He chafes her lips; a thousand ways he seeks
To mend the hurt that his unkindness marrd:
  He kisses her; and she, by her good will,
  Will never rise, so he will kiss her still.        480

The night of sorrow now is turnd to day:
Her two blue windows faintly she up-heaveth,
Like the fair sun when in his fresh array
He cheers the morn, and all the world relieveth:     484
  And as the bright sun glorifies the sky,
  So is her face illumind with her eye.

Whose beams upon his hairless face are fixd,
As if from thence they borrowd all their shine.     488
Were never four such lamps together mixd,
Had not his clouded with his brows repine;
  But hers, which through the crystal tears gave light
  Shone like the moon in water seen by night.        492

O where am I? quoth she, in earth or heaven?
Or in the ocean drenchd, or in the fire?
What hour is this? or morn or weary even?
Do I delight to die, or life desire?                 496
  But now I livd, and life was deaths annoy;
  But now I died, and death was lively joy.

O thou didst kill me; kill me once again:
Thy eyes shrewd tutor, that hard heart of thine,    500
Hath taught them scornful tricks, and such disdain,
That they have murderd this poor heart of mine;
  And these mine eyes, true leaders to their queen,
  But for thy piteous lips no more had seen.         504

Long may they kiss each other for this cure!
Oh never let their crimson liveries wear,
And as they last, their verdure still endure,
To drive infection from the dangerous year:          508
  That the star-gazers, having writ on death,
  May say, the plague is banishd by thy breath.

Pure lips, sweet seals in my soft lips imprinted,
What bargains may I make, still to be sealing?       512
To sell myself I can be well contented,
So thou wilt buy, and pay, and use good dealing;
  Which purchase if thou make, for fear of slips,
  Set thy seal manual on my wax-red lips.            516

A thousand kisses buys my heart from me;
And pay them at thy leisure, one by one,
What is ten hundred touches unto thee?
Are they not quickly told and quickly gone?          520
  Say, for non-payment that the debt should double,
  Is twenty hundred kisses such a trouble?

Fair queen, quoth he, if any love you owe me,
Measure my strangeness with my unripe years:         524
Before I know myself, seek not to know me;
No fisher but the ungrown fry forbears:
  The mellow plum doth fall, the green sticks fast,
  Or being early pluckd, is sour to taste.          528

Look the worlds comforter, with weary gait
His days hot task hath ended in the west;
The owl, nights herald, shrieks, tis very late;
The sheep are gone to fold, birds to their nest,     532
  And coal-black clouds that shadow heavens light
  Do summon us to part, and bid good night.

Now let me say good night, and so say you;
If you will say so, you shall have a kiss.          536
Good night, quoth she; and ere he says adieu,
The honey fee of parting tenderd is:
  Her arms do lend his neck a sweet embrace;
  Incorporate then they seem, face grows to face.    540

Till breathless he disjoind, and backward drew
The heavenly moisture, that sweet coral mouth,
Whose precious taste her thirsty lips well knew,
Whereon they surfeit, yet complain on drouth,        544
  He with her plenty pressd, she faint with dearth,
  Their lips together glued, fall to the earth.

Now quick desire hath caught the yielding prey,
And glutton-like she feeds, yet never filleth;       548
Her lips are conquerors, his lips obey,
Paying what ransom the insulter willeth;
  Whose vulture thought doth pitch the price so high,
  That she will draw his lips rich treasure dry.    552

And having felt the sweetness of the spoil,
With blindfold fury she begins to forage;
Her face doth reek and smoke, her blood doth boil,
And careless lust stirs up a desperate courage,      556
  Planting oblivion, beating reason back,
  Forgetting shames pure blush and honours wrack.

Hot, faint, and weary, with her hard embracing,
Like a wild bird being tamd with too much handling,
Or as the fleet-foot roe thats tird with chasing,  561
Or like the froward infant stilld with dandling:
  He now obeys, and now no more resisteth,
  While she takes all she can, not all she listeth.  564

What wax so frozen but dissolves with tempring,
And yields at last to every light impression?
Things out of hope are compassd oft with ventring,
Chiefly in love, whose leave exceeds commission:     568
  Affection faints not like a pale-facd coward,
  But then woos best when most his choice is froward.

When he did frown, O had she then gave over,
Such nectar from his lips she had not suckd.        572
Foul words and frowns must not repel a lover;
What though the rose have prickles, yet tis pluckd.
  Were beauty under twenty locks kept fast,
  Yet love breaks through, and picks them all at last.

For pity now she can no more detain him;             577
The poor fool prays her that he may depart:
She is resolvd no longer to restrain him,
Bids him farewell, and look well to her heart,       580
  The which by Cupids bow she doth protest,
  He carries thence encaged in his breast.

Sweet boy, she says, this night Ill waste in sorrow,
For my sick heart commands mine eyes to watch.       584
Tell me, loves master, shall we meet tomorrow
Say, shall we? shall we? wilt thou make the match?
  He tells her no, tomorrow he intends
  To hunt the boar with certain of his friends.      588

The boar! quoth she; whereat a sudden pale,
Like lawn being spread upon the blushing rose,
Usurps her cheek, she trembles at his tale,
And on his neck her yoking arms she throws.          592
  She sinketh down, still hanging by his neck,
  He on her belly falls, she on her back.

Now is she in the very lists of love,
Her champion mounted for the hot encounter:          596
All is imaginary she doth prove,
He will not manage her, although he mount her;
  That worse than Tantalus is her annoy,
  To clip Elysium and to lack her joy.               600

Even as poor birds, deceivd with painted grapes,
Do surfeit by the eye and pine the maw:
Even so she languisheth in her mishaps,
As those poor birds that helpless berries saw.       604
  The warm effects which she in him finds missing,
  She seeks to kindle with continual kissing.

But all in vain, good queen, it will not be,
She hath assayd as much as may be provd;           608
Her pleading hath deservd a greater fee;
Shes love, she loves, and yet she is not lovd.
  Fie, fie, he says, you crush me; let me go;
  You have no reason to withhold me so.             612

Thou hadst been gone, quoth she, sweet boy, ere this,
But that thou toldst me thou wouldst hunt the boar.
Oh be advisd; thou knowst not what it is,
With javelins point a churlish swine to gore,       616
  Whose tushes never sheathd he whetteth still,
  Like to a mortal butcher, bent to kill.

On his bow-back he hath a battle set
Of bristly pikes, that ever threat his foes;         620
His eyes like glow-worms shine when he doth fret;
His snout digs sepulchres whereer he goes;
  Being movd, he strikes whateer is in his way,
  And whom he strikes his crooked tushes slay.       624

His brawny sides, with hairy bristles armed,
Are better proof than thy spears point can enter;
His short thick neck cannot be easily harmed;
Being ireful, on the lion he will venture:           628
  The thorny brambles and embracing bushes,
  As fearful of him, part, through whom he rushes.

Alas! he naught esteems that face of thine,
To which loves eyes pay tributary gazes;            632
Nor thy soft hands, sweet lips, and crystal eyne,
Whose full perfection all the world amazes;
  But having thee at vantage, wondrous dread!
  Would root these beauties as he roots the mead.

Oh let him keep his loathsome cabin still,          637
Beauty hath naught to do with such foul fiends:
Come not within his danger by thy will;
They that thrive well, take counsel of their friends.
  When thou didst name the boar, not to dissemble,
  I feard thy fortune, and my joints did tremble.

Didst thou not mark my face, was it not white?
Sawst thou not signs of fear lurk in mine eye?      644
Grew I not faint, and fell I not downright?
Within my bosom, whereon thou dost lie,
  My boding heart pants, beats, and takes no rest,
  But like an earthquake, shakes thee on my breast.

For where love reigns, disturbing jealousy          649
Doth call himself affections sentinel;
Gives false alarms, suggesteth mutiny,
And in a peaceful hour doth cry Kill, kill!        652
  Distempring gentle love in his desire,
  As air and water do abate the fire.

This sour informer, this bate-breeding spy,
This canker that eats up loves tender spring,       656
This carry-tale, dissentious jealousy,
That sometime true news, sometime false doth bring,
  Knocks at my heart, and whispers in mine ear,
  That if I love thee, I thy death should fear.      660

And more than so, presenteth to mine eye
The picture of an angry chafing boar,
Under whose sharp fangs on his back doth lie
An image like thyself, all staind with gore;        664
  Whose blood upon the fresh flowers being shed,
  Doth make them droop with grief and hang the head.

What should I do, seeing thee so indeed,
That tremble at thimagination?                      668
The thought of it doth make my faint heart bleed,
And fear doth teach it divination:
  I prophesy thy death, my living sorrow,
  If thou encounter with the boar tomorrow.          672

But if thou needs wilt hunt, be ruld by me;
Uncouple at the timorous flying hare,
Or at the fox which lives by subtilty,
Or at the roe which no encounter dare:               676
  Pursue these fearful creatures oer the downs,
  And on thy well-breathd horse keep with thy hounds.

And when thou hast on foot the purblind hare,
Mark the poor wretch, to overshoot his troubles      680
How he outruns the wind, and with what care
He cranks and crosses with a thousand doubles:
  The many musits through the which he goes
  Are like a labyrinth to amaze his foes.            684

Sometime he runs among a flock of sheep,
To make the cunning hounds mistake their smell,
And sometime where earth-delving conies keep,
To stop the loud pursuers in their yell,             688
  And sometime sorteth with a herd of deer;
  Danger deviseth shifts, wit waits on fear.

For there his smell with others being mingled,      691
The hot scent-snuffing hounds are driven to doubt,
Ceasing their clamorous cry, till they have singled
With much ado the cold fault cleanly out;
  Then do they spend their mouths: echo replies,
  As if another chase were in the skies.             696

By this, poor Wat, far off upon a hill,
Stands on his hinder legs with listning ear,
To hearken if his foes pursue him still.
Anon their loud alarums he doth hear;                700
  And now his grief may be compared well
  To one sore sick that hears the passing bell.

Then shalt thou see the dew-bedabbled wretch
Turn, and return, indenting with the way,            704
Each envious briar his weary legs do scratch,
Each shadow makes him stop, each murmur stay:
  For misery is trodden on by many,
  And being low never relievd by any.               708

Lie quietly, and hear a little more;
Nay, do not struggle, for thou shalt not rise:
To make thee hate the hunting of the boar,
Unlike myself thou hearst me moralize,              712
  Applying this to that, and so to so,
  For love can comment upon every woe.

Where did I leave? No matter where, quoth he
Leave me, and then the story aptly ends:            716
The night is spent. Why, what of that? quoth she.
I am, quoth he, expected of my friends;
  And now tis dark, and going I shall fall.
  In night, quoth she, desire sees best of all.  720

But if thou fall, oh then imagine this,
The earth, in love with thee, thy footing trips,
And all is but to rob thee of a kiss.                723
Rich preys make true men thieves; so do thy lips
  Make modest Dian cloudy and forlorn,
  Lest she should steal a kiss and die forsworn.

Now of this dark night I perceive the reason:
Cynthia for shame obscures her silver shine          728
Till forging nature be condemnd of treason,
For stealing moulds from heaven, that were divine;
  Wherein she framd thee, in high heavens despite,
  To shame the sun by day and her by night.          732

And therefore hath she bribd the destinies,
To cross the curious workmanship of nature,
To mingle beauty with infirmities,
And pure perfection with impure defeature,           736
  Making it subject to the tyranny
  Of mad mischances and much misery.

As burning fevers, agues pale and faint,
Life-poisoning pestilence and frenzies wood,         740
The marrow-eating sickness, whose attaint
Disorder breeds by heating of the blood;
  Surfeits, imposthumes, grief, and damnd despair,
  Swear natures death, for framing thee so fair.    744

And not the least of all these maladies
But in one minutes fight brings beauty under:
Both favour, savour, hue and qualities,
Whereat thimpartial gazer late did wonder,          748
  Are on the sudden wasted, thawd and done,
  As mountain snow melts with the midday sun.

Therefore despite of fruitless chastity,
Love-lacking vestals and self-loving nuns,           752
That on the earth would breed a scarcity
And barren dearth of daughters and of sons,
  Be prodigal: the lamp that burns by night
  Dries up his oil to lend the world his light.      756

What is thy body but a swallowing grave,
Seeming to bury that posterity,
Which by the rights of time thou needs must have,
If thou destroy them not in dark obscurity?          760
  If so, the world will hold thee in disdain,
  Sith in thy pride so fair a hope is slain.

So in thyself thyself art made away;
A mischief worse than civil home-bred strife,        764
Or theirs whose desperate hands themselves do slay,
Or butcher sire that reeves his son of life.
  Foul cankring rust the hidden treasure frets,
  But gold thats put to use more gold begets.      768

Nay then, quoth Adon, you will fall again
Into your idle over-handled theme;
The kiss I gave you is bestowd in vain,
And all in vain you strive against the stream;       772
  For by this black-facd night, desires foul nurse,
  Your treatise makes me like you worse and worse.

If love have lent you twenty thousand tongues,
And every tongue more moving than your own,          776
Bewitching like the wanton mermaids songs,
Yet from mine ear the tempting tune is blown;
  For know, my heart stands armed in mine ear,
  And will not let a false sound enter there.        780

Lest the deceiving harmony should run
Into the quiet closure of my breast,
And then my little heart were quite undone,
In his bedchamber to be barrd of rest.              784
  No, lady, no; my heart longs not to groan,
  But soundly sleeps, while now it sleeps alone.

What have you urgd that I cannot reprove?
The path is smooth that leadeth on to danger;        790
I hate not love, but your device in love
That lends embracements unto every stranger.
  You do it for increase: O strange excuse!
  When reason is the bawd to lusts abuse.           792

Call it not, love, for love to heaven is fled,
Since sweating lust on earth usurpd his name;
Under whose simple semblance he hath fed
Upon fresh beauty, blotting it with blame;           796
  Which the hot tyrant stains and soon bereaves,
  As caterpillars do the tender leaves.

Love comforteth like sunshine after rain,
But lusts effect is tempest after sun;              800
Loves gentle spring doth always fresh remain,
Lusts winter comes ere summer half be done.
  Love surfeits not, lust like a glutton dies;
  Love is all truth, lust full of forged lies.       804

More I could tell, but more I dare not say;
The text is old, the orator too green.
Therefore, in sadness, now I will away;
My face is full of shame, my heart of teen,          808
  Mine ears, that to your wanton talk attended
  Do burn themselves for having so offended.

With this he breaketh from the sweet embrace         811
Of those fair arms which bound him to her breast,
And homeward through the dark laund runs apace;
Leaves love upon her back deeply distressd.
  Look how a bright star shooteth from the sky,
  So glides he in the night from Venus eye.         816

Which after him she darts, as one on shore
Gazing upon a late embarked friend,
Till the wild waves will have him seen no more,
Whose ridges with the meeting clouds contend:        820
  So did the merciless and pitchy night
  Fold in the object that did feed her sight.

Whereat amazd, as one that unaware
Hath droppd a precious jewel in the flood,          824
Or stonishd as night-wanderers often are,
Their light blown out in some mistrustful wood;
  Even so confounded in the dark she lay,
  Having lost the fair discovery of her way.         828

And now she beats her heart, whereat it groans,
That all the neighbour caves, as seeming troubled,
Make verbal repetition of her moans;
Passion on passion deeply is redoubled:              832
  Ay me! she cries, and twenty times, Woe, woe!
  And twenty echoes twenty times cry so.

She marking them, begins a wailing note,
And sings extemporally a woeful ditty;               836
How love makes young men thrall, and old men dote,
How love is wise in folly foolish witty:
  Her heavy anthem still concludes in woe,
  And still the choir of echoes answer so.           840

Her song was tedious, and outwore the night,
For lovers hours are long, though seeming short,
If pleasd themselves, others they think, delight
In such like circumstance, with such like sport:     844
  Their copious stories oftentimes begun,
  End without audience, and are never done.

For who hath she to spend the night withal,
But idle sounds resembling parasites;                848
Like shrill-tongud tapsters answering every call,
Soothing the humour of fantastic wits?
  She says, Tis so: they answer all, Tis so;
  And would say after her, if she said No.         852

Lo here the gentle lark, weary of rest,
From his moist cabinet mounts up on high,
And wakes the morning, from whose silver breast
The sun ariseth in his majesty;                      856
  Who doth the world so gloriously behold,
  That cedar tops and hills seem burnishd gold.

Venus salutes him with this fair good morrow:
Oh thou clear god, and patron of all light,         860
From whom each lamp and shining star doth borrow
The beauteous influence that makes him bright,
  There lives a son that suckd an earthly mother,
  May lend thee light, as thou dost lend to other.

This said, she hasteth to a myrtle grove,            865
Musing the morning is so much oerworn,
And yet she hears no tidings of her love;
She hearkens for his hounds and for his horn.        868
  Anon she hears them chant it lustily,
  And all in haste she coasteth to the cry.

And as she runs, the bushes in the way
Some catch her by the neck, some kiss her face,      872
Some twine about her thigh to make her stay:
She wildly breaketh from their strict embrace,
  Like a milch doe, whose swelling dugs do ache,
  Hasting to feed her fawn hid in some brake.        876

By this she hears the hounds are at a bay,
Whereat she starts like one that spies an adder
Wreathd up in fatal folds just in his way,
The fear whereof doth make him shake and shudder;    880
  Even so the timorous yelping of the hounds
  Appals her senses, and her spirit confounds.

For now she knows it is no gentle chase,
But the blunt boar, rough bear, or lion proud,       884
Because the cry remaineth in one place,
Where fearfully the dogs exclaim aloud,
  Finding their enemy to be so curst,
  They all strain courtsy who shall cope him first. 888

This dismal cry rings sadly in her ear,
Through which it enters to surprise her heart;
Who overcome by doubt and bloodless fear,
With cold-pale weakness numbs each feeling part;     892
  Like soldiers when their captain once doth yield,
  They basely fly and dare not stay the field.

Thus stands she in a trembling ecstasy,
Till cheering up her senses sore dismayd,           896
She tells them tis a causeless fantasy,
And childish error, that they are afraid;
  Bids them leave quaking, bids them fear no more:
  And with that word, she spied the hunted boar.     900

Whose frothy mouth bepainted all with red,
Like milk and blood being mingled both together,
A second fear through all her sinews spread,
Which madly hurries her she knows not whither:       904
  This way she runs, and now she will no further,
  But back retires, to rate the boar for murther.

A thousand spleens bear her a thousand ways,
She treads the path that she untreads again;         908
Her more than haste is mated with delays,
Like the proceedings of a drunken brain,
  Full of respects, yet naught at all respecting,
  In hand with all things, naught at all effecting.

Here kenneld in a brake she finds a hound,          913
And asks the weary caitiff for his master,
And there another licking of his wound,
Gainst venomd sores the only sovereign plaster.    916
  And here she meets another sadly scowling,
  To whom she speaks, and he replies with howling.

When he hath ceasd his ill-resounding noise,
Another flap-mouthd mourner, black and grim,        920
Against the welkin volleys out his voice;
Another and another answer him,
  Clapping their proud tails to the ground below,
  Shaking their scratchd ears, bleeding as they go.

Look how the worlds poor people are amazed          925
At apparitions, signs, and prodigies,
Whereon with fearful eyes they long have gazed,
Infusing them with dreadful prophecies;              928
  So she at these sad sighs draws up her breath,
  And sighing it again, exclaims on death.

Hard-favourd tyrant, ugly, meagre, lean,           931
Hateful divorce of love, thus chides she death,
Grim-grinning ghost, earths worm, what dost thou mean?
To stifle beauty and to steal his breath,
  Who when he livd, his breath and beauty set
  Gloss on the rose, smell to the violet.            936

If he be dead, O no, it cannot be,
Seeing his beauty, thou shouldst strike at it,
O yes, it may, thou hast no eyes to see,
But hatefully at random dost thou hit.               940
  Thy mark is feeble age, but thy false dart
  Mistakes that aim, and cleaves an infants heart.

Hadst thou but bid beware, then he had spoke,
And hearing him, thy power had lost his power.       944
The destinies will curse thee for this stroke;
They bid thee crop a weed, thou pluckst a flower.
  Loves golden arrow at him should have fled,
  And not deaths ebon dart to strike him dead.      948

Dost thou drink tears, that thou provokst such weeping?
What may a heavy groan advantage thee?
Why hast thou cast into eternal sleeping
Those eyes that taught all other eyes to see?        952
  Now nature cares not for thy mortal vigour,
  Since her best work is ruind with thy rigour.

Here overcome, as one full of despair,
She vaild her eyelids, who like sluices stoppd     956
The crystal tide that from her two cheeks fair
In the sweet channel of her bosom droppd
  But through the flood-gates breaks the silver rain,
  And with his strong course opens them again.       960

O how her eyes and tears did lend and borrow;
Her eyes seen in the tears, tears in her eye;
Both crystals, where they viewd each others sorrow,
Sorrow that friendly sighs sought still to dry;      964
  But like a stormy day, now wind, now rain,
  Sighs dry her cheeks, tears make them wet again.

Variable passions throng her constant woe,
As striving who should best become her grief;        968
All entertaind, each passion labours so,
That every present sorrow seemeth chief,
  But none is best, then join they all together,
  Like many clouds consulting for foul weather.      972

By this, far off she hears some huntsman holla;
A nurses song neer pleasd her babe so well:
The dire imagination she did follow
This sound of hope doth labour to expel;             976
  For now reviving joy bids her rejoice,
  And flatters her it is Adonis voice.

Whereat her tears began to turn their tide,
Being prisond in her eye, like pearls in glass;     980
Yet sometimes falls an orient drop beside,
Which her cheek melts, as scorning it should pass
  To wash the foul face of the sluttish ground,
  Who is but drunken when she seemeth drownd.

O hard-believing love, how strange it seems          985
Not to believe, and yet too credulous;
Thy weal and woe are both of them extremes;
Despair and hope make thee ridiculous,               988
  The one doth flatter thee in thoughts unlikely,
  In likely thoughts the other kills thee quickly.

Now she unweaves the web that she hath wrought,
Adonis lives, and death is not to blame;             992
It was not she that calld him all to naught;
Now she adds honours to his hateful name.
  She clepes him king of graves, and grave for kings,
  Imperious supreme of all mortal things.            996

No, no, quoth she, sweet death, I did but jest;
Yet pardon me, I felt a kind of fear
Whenas I met the boar, that bloody beast,
Which knows no pity, but is still severe;           1000
  Then, gentle shadow,truth I must confess
  I raild on thee, fearing my loves decease.

Tis not my fault, the boar provokd my tongue;
Be wreakd on him, invisible commander;             1004
Tis he, foul creature, that hath done thee wrong;
I did but act, hes author of my slander.
  Grief hath two tongues, and never woman yet,
  Could rule them both, without ten womens wit.

Thus hoping that Adonis is alive,                   1009
Her rash suspect she doth extenuate;
And that his beauty may the better thrive,
With death she humbly doth insinuate;               1012
  Tells him of trophies, statues, tombs and stories
  His victories, his triumphs and his glories.

O love! quoth she, how much a fool was I,
To be of such a weak and silly mind,                1016
To wail his death who lives, and must not die
Till mutual overthrow of mortal kind;
  For he being dead, with him is beauty slain,
  And beauty dead, black Chaos comes again.         1020

Fie, fie, fond love, thou art as full of fear
As one with treasure laden, hemmd with thieves,
Trifles unwitnessed with eye or ear,
Thy coward heart with false bethinking grieves.    1024
  Even at this word she hears a merry horn,
  Whereat she leaps that was but late forlorn.

As falcon to the lure, away she flies;
The grass stoops not, she treads on it so light,    1028
And in her haste unfortunately spies
The foul boars conquest on her fair delight;
  Which seen, her eyes, as murderd with the view,
  Like stars ashamd of day, themselves withdrew.

Or as the snail, whose tender horns being hit,      1033
Shrinks backwards in his shelly cave with pain,
And there all smotherd up, in shade doth sit,
Long after fearing to creep forth again:            1036
  So at his bloody view her eyes are fled
  Into the deep dark cabins of her head.

Where they resign their office and their light
To the disposing of her troubled brain,             1040
Who bids them still consort with ugly night,
And never wound the heart with looks again;
  Who like a king perplexed in his throne,
  By their suggestion gives a deadly groan.         1044

Whereat each tributary subject quakes,
As when the wind imprisond in the ground,
Struggling for passage, earths foundation shakes,
Which with cold terror doth mens minds confound.
  This mutiny each part doth so surprise            1049
  That from their dark beds once more leap her eyes.

And being opend, threw unwilling light
Upon the wide wound that the boar had trenchd
In his soft flank, whose wonted lily white          1053
With purple tears that his wound wept, was drenchd.
  No flower was nigh, no grass, herb, leaf or weed,
  But stole his blood and seemd with him to bleed.

This solemn sympathy poor Venus noteth,             1057
Over one shoulder doth she hang her head,
Dumbly she passions, franticly she doteth;
She thinks he could not die, he is not dead:        1060
  Her voice is stoppd, her joints forget to bow,
  Her eyes are mad, that they have wept till now.

Upon his hurt she looks so steadfastly,
That her sight dazzling makes the wound seem three;
And then she reprehends her mangling eye,           1065
That makes more gashes, where no breach should be:
  His face seems twain, each several limb is doubled,
  For oft the eye mistakes, the brain being troubled.

My tongue cannot express my grief for one,         1069
And yet, quoth she, behold two Adons dead!
My sighs are blown away, my salt tears gone,
Mine eyes are turnd to fire, my heart to lead:     1072
  Heavy hearts lead, melt at mine eyes red fire!
  So shall I die by drops of hot desire.

Alas poor world, what treasure hast thou lost!
What face remains alive thats worth the viewing?
Whose tongue is music now? what canst thou boast
Of things long since, or anything ensuing?          1078
  The flowers are sweet, their colours fresh and trim,
  But true sweet beauty livd and died with him.

Bonnet nor veil henceforth no creature wear!       1081
Nor sun nor wind will ever strive to kiss you:
Having no fair to lose, you need not fear;
The sun doth scorn you, and the wind doth hiss you.
  But when Adonis livd, sun and sharp air          1085
  Lurkd like two thieves, to rob him of his fair.

And therefore would he put his bonnet on,
Under whose brim the gaudy sun would peep;          1088
The wind would blow it off, and being gone,
Play with his locks; then would Adonis weep;
  And straight, in pity of his tender years,
  They both would strive who first should dry his tears.

To see his face the lion walkd along              1093
Behind some hedge, because he would not fear him;
To recreate himself when he hath sung,
The tiger would be tame and gently hear him.        1096
  If he had spoke, the wolf would leave his prey,
  And never fright the silly lamb that day.

When he beheld his shadow in the brook,
The fishes spread on it their golden gills;         1100
When he was by, the birds such pleasure took,
That some would sing, some other in their bills
  Would bring him mulberries and ripe-red cherries,
  He fed them with his sight, they him with berries.

But this foul, grim, and urchin-snouted boar,      1105
Whose downward eye still looketh for a grave,
Neer saw the beauteous livery that he wore;
Witness the entertainment that he gave.             1108
  If he did see his face, why then I know
  He thought to kiss him, and hath killd him so.

Tis true, tis true; thus was Adonis slain:
He ran upon the boar with his sharp spear,          1112
Who did not whet his teeth at him again,
But by a kiss thought to persuade him there;
  And nuzzling in his flank, the loving swine
  Sheathd unaware the tusk in his soft groin.      1116

Had I been toothd like him, I must confess,
With kissing him I should have killd him first;
But he is dead, and never did he bless
My youth with his; the more am I accurst.          1120
  With this she falleth in the place she stood,
  And stains her face with his congealed blood.

She looks upon his lips, and they are pale;
She takes him by the hand, and that is cold,        1124
She whispers in his ears a heavy tale,
As if they heard the woeful words she told;
She lifts the coffer-lids that close his eyes,
Where lo, two lamps burnt out in darkness lies.

Two glasses where herself herself beheld            1129
A thousand times, and now no more reflect;
Their virtue lost, wherein they late excelld,
And every beauty robbd of his effect.              1132
  Wonder of time, quoth she, this is my spite,
  That thou being dead, the day should yet be light.

Since thou art dead, lo here I prophesy,
Sorrow on love hereafter shall attend:              1136
It shall be waited on with jealousy,
Find sweet beginning, but unsavoury end;
  Neer settled equally, but high or low,
  That all loves pleasure shall not match his woe.

It shall be fickle, false and full of fraud,       1141
Bud, and be blasted in a breathing while;
The bottom poison, and the top oerstrawd
With sweets that shall the truest sight beguile.    1144
  The strongest body shall it make most weak,
  Strike the wise dumb, and teach the fool to speak.

It shall be sparing, and too full of riot,
Teaching decrepit age to tread the measures;        1148
The staring ruffian shall it keep in quiet,
Pluck down the rich, enrich the poor with treasures;
  It shall be raging mad, and silly mild,
  Make the young old, the old become a child.       1152

It shall suspect where is no cause of fear,
It shall not fear where it should most mistrust;
It shall be merciful, and too severe,
And most deceiving when it seems most just;         1156
  Perverse it shall be, where it shows most toward,
  Put fear to valour, courage to the coward.

It shall be cause of war and dire events,
And set dissension twixt the son and sire;         1160
Subject and servile to all discontents,
As dry combustious matter is to fire,
  Sith in his prime death doth my love destroy,
  They that love best their love shall not enjoy.  1164

By this the boy that by her side lay killd
Was melted like a vapour from her sight,
And in his blood that on the ground lay spilld,
A purple flower sprung up, chequerd with white,    1168
  Resembling well his pale cheeks, and the blood
  Which in round drops upon their whiteness stood.

She bows her head, the new-sprung flower to smell,
Comparing it to her Adonis breath;                 1172
And says within her bosom it shall dwell,
Since he himself is reft from her by death;
  She drops the stalk, and in the breach appears
  Green-dropping sap, which she compares to tears.

Poor flower, quoth she, this was thy fathers guise,
Sweet issue of a more sweet-smelling sire,
For every little grief to wet his eyes,
To grow unto himself was his desire,                1180
  And so tis thine; but know, it is as good
  To wither in my breast as in his blood.

Here was thy fathers bed, here in my breast;
Thou art the next of blood, and tis thy right:     1184
Lo in this hollow cradle take thy rest,
My throbbing heart shall rock thee day and night:
  There shall not be one minute in an hour
  Wherein I will not kiss my sweet loves flower.

Thus weary of the world, away she hies,             1189
And yokes her silver doves; by whose swift aid
Their mistress mounted through the empty skies,
In her light chariot quickly is conveyd;           1192
  Holding their course to Paphos, where their queen
  Means to immure herself and not be seen.




  FINIS